=== PDF Page 1 | Book Page 1 ===
1CHAPTER The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 1.1Propositional Logic 1.2Applications ofPropositionalLogic 1.3PropositionalEquivalences 1.4Predicates andQuantifiers 1.5NestedQuantifiers 1.6Rules ofInference 1.7Introduction toProofs 1.8Proof Methodsand StrategyThe rules of logic specify the meaning of mathematical statements. For instance, these rules help us understand and reason with statements such as “There exists an integer that is not the sum of two squares” and “For every positive integer n, the sum of the positive integers not exceeding nisn(n+1)∕2.” Logic is the basis of all mathematical reasoning, and of all automated reasoning. It has practical applications to the design of computing ma-chines, to the specification of systems, to artificial intelligence, to computer programming, toprogramming languages, and to other areas of computer science, as well as to many other fieldsof study. To understand mathematics, we must understand what makes up a correct mathematical argument, that is, a proof. Once we prove a mathematical statement is true, we call it a theorem.A collection of theorems on a topic organize what we know about this topic. To learn a math-ematical topic, a person needs to actively construct mathematical arguments on this topic, andnot just read exposition. Moreover, knowing the proof of a theorem often makes it possible tomodify the result to fit new situations. Everyone knows that proofs are important throughout mathematics, but many people find it surprising how important proofs are in computer science. In fact, proofs are used to verifythat computer programs produce the correct output for all possible input values, to show thatalgorithms always produce the correct result, to establish the security of a system, and to createartificial intelligence. Furthermore, automated reasoning systems have been created to allowcomputers to construct their own proofs. In this chapter, we will explain what makes up a correct mathematical argument and introduce tools to construct these arguments. We will develop an arsenal of different proof methodsthat will enable us to prove many different types of results. After introducing many differentmethods of proof, we will introduce several strategies for constructing proofs. We will intro-duce the notion of a conjecture and explain the process of developing mathematics by studyingconjectures. 1.1 Propositional Logic 1.1.1 Introduction The rules of logic give precise meaning to mathematical statements. These rules are used to dis-tinguish between valid and invalid mathematical arguments. Because a major goal of this bookis to teach the reader how to understand and how to construct correct mathematical arguments,we begin our study of discrete mathematics with an introduction to logic. Besides the importance of logic in understanding mathematical reasoning, logic has numerous applications to computer science. These rules are used in the design of computer circuits,the construction of computer programs, the verification of the correctness of programs, and inmany other ways. Furthermore, software systems have been developed for constructing some,but not all, types of proofs automatically. We will discuss these applications of logic in this andlater chapters. 1

=== PDF Page 2 | Book Page 21 ===
21 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 1.1.2 Propositions Our discussion begins with an introduction to the basic building blocks of logic—propositions. Aproposition is a declarative sentence (that is, a sentence that declares a fact) that is either true or false, but not both. EXAMPLE 1 All the following declarative sentences are propositions. 1. Washington, D.C., is the capital of the United States of America. Extra Examples 2. Toronto is the capital of Canada. 3. 1+1=2. 4. 2+2=3. Propositions 1 and 3 are true, whereas 2 and 4 are false. ◂ Some sentences that are not propositions are given in Example 2. EXAMPLE 2 Consider the following sentences. 1. What time is it? 2. Read this carefully. 3.x+1=2. 4.x+y=z. Sentences 1 and 2 are not propositions because they are not declarative sentences. Sentences 3 and 4 are not propositions because they are neither true nor false. Note that each of sentences 3 and 4 can be turned into a proposition if we assign values to the variables. We will also discuss other ways to turn sentences such as these into propositions in Section 1.4. ◂ We use letters to denote propositional variables (orsentential variables ), that is, variables that represent propositions, just as letters are used to denote numerical variables. The conventional letters used for propositional variables are p, q, r, s,….Thetruth value of a proposition Source: National Library of MedicineARISTOTLE (384 B.C.E.–322 B.C.E.)Aristotle was born in Stagirus (Stagira) in northern Greece. His fatherLinks was the personal physician of the King of Macedonia. Because his father died when Aristotle was young, Aristotle could not follow the custom of following his father’s profession. Aristotle became an orphan at a young age when his mother also died. His guardian who raised him taught him poetry, rhetoric, and Greek. At the age of 17, his guardian sent him to Athens to further his education. Aristotle joined Plato’s Academy, where for 20 years he attended Plato’s lectures, later presenting his own lectures on rhetoric. When Plato died in 347 B.C.E., Aristotle was not chosen to succeed him because his views differed too much from those of Plato. Instead, Aristotle joined the court of King Hermeas where he remained for three years, and married the niece of the King. When the Persians defeated Hermeas, Aristotle moved to Mytilene and, at the invitation of King Philip of Macedonia, he tutored Alexander, Philip’s son, who later became Alexander the Great. Aristotle tutored Alexander for five years and after the death of King Philip, he returned to Athens and set up his own school, called the Lyceum. Aristotle’s followers were called the peripatetics, which means “to walk about,” because Aristotle often walked around as he discussed philosophical questions. Aristotle taught at the Lyceum for 13 years where he lectured to his advanced students in the morning and gave popular lectures to a broad audience in the evening. When Alexander the Great died in 323 B.C.E., a backlash against anything related to Alexander led to trumped-up charges of impiety against Aristotle. Aristotle fled to Chalcis to avoid prosecution. He only lived one year in Chalcis, dying of a stomach ailment in 322 B.C.E. Aristotle wrote three types of works: those written for a popular audience, compilations of scientific facts, and systematic treatises. The systematic treatises included works on logic, philosophy, psychology, physics, and natural history. Aristotle’s writings were preserved by a student and were hidden in a vault where a wealthy book collector discovered them about 200 years later. They were taken to Rome, where they were studied by scholars and issued in new editions, preserving them for posterity.

=== PDF Page 3 | Book Page 3 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 3 is true, denoted by T, if it is a true proposition, and the truth value of a proposition is false, denoted by F, if it is a false proposition. Propositions that cannot be expressed in terms of simplerpropositions are called atomic propositions. The area of logic that deals with propositions is called the propositional calculus orpropositional logic. It was first developed systematically by the Greek philosopher Aristotle more than2300 years ago. We now turn our attention to methods for producing new propositions from those that we Linksalready have. These methods were discussed by the English mathematician George Boole in1854 in his book The Laws of Thought. Many mathematical statements are constructed by combining one or more propositions. New propositions, called compound propositions ,a r ef o r m e d from existing propositions using logical operators . Definition 1 Letpbe a proposition. The negation of p, denoted by ¬p(also denoted by p), is the statement “It is not the case that p.” The proposition ¬pis read “not p.” The truth value of the negation of p,¬p, is the opposite of the truth value of p. Remark: The notation for the negation operator is not standardized. Although ¬pandpare the most common notations used in mathematics to express the negation of p, other notations you might see are ∼p,−p,p′,Np, and!p. EXAMPLE 3 Find the negation of the proposition “Michael’s PC runs Linux” and express this in simple English.Extra Examples Solution: The negation is “It is not the case that Michael’s PC runs Linux.” This negation can be more simply expressed as “Michael’s PC does not run Linux.” ◂ EXAMPLE 4 Find the negation of the proposition “Vandana’s smartphone has at least 32 GB of memory” and express this in simple English. Solution: The negation is “It is not the case that Vandana’s smartphone has at least 32 GB of memory.” This negation can also be expressed as “Vandana’s smartphone does not have at least 32 GB of memory” or even more simply as “Vandana’s smartphone has less than 32 GB of memory.” ◂

=== PDF Page 4 | Book Page 41 ===
41 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs TABLE 1 The Truth Table for the Negation of a Proposition. p ¬p T F F TTable 1 displays the truth table for the negation of a proposition p. This table has a row for each of the two possible truth values of p. Each row shows the truth value of ¬pcorresponding to the truth value of pfor this row. The negation of a proposition can also be considered the result of the operation of the negation operator on a proposition. The negation operator constructs a new proposition from a single existing proposition. We will now introduce the logical operators that are used to form new propositions from two or more existing propositions. These logical operators are also calledconnectives. Definition 2 Letpandqbe propositions. The conjunction ofpandq, denoted by p∧q, is the proposition “pandq.” The conjunction p∧qis true when both pandqare true and is false otherwise. Table 2 displays the truth table of p∧q. This table has a row for each of the four possible combinations of truth values of pandq. The four rows correspond to the pairs of truth values TT, TF, FT, and FF, where the first truth value in the pair is the truth value of pand the second truth value is the truth value of q. Note that in logic the word “but” sometimes is used instead of “and” in a conjunction. For example, the statement “The sun is shining, but it is raining” is another way of saying “The sunis shining and it is raining.” (In natural language, there is a subtle difference in meaning between“and” and “but”; we will not be concerned with this nuance here.) EXAMPLE 5 Find the conjunction of the propositions pandqwhere pis the proposition “Rebecca’s PC has more than 16 GB free hard disk space” and qis the proposition “The processor in Rebecca’s PC runs faster than 1 GHz.” Solution: The conjunction of these propositions, p∧q, is the proposition “Rebecca’s PC has more than 16 GB free hard disk space, and the processor in Rebecca’s PC runs faster than 1 GHz.” This conjunction can be expressed more simply as “Rebecca’s PC has more than16 GB free hard disk space, and its processor runs faster than 1 GHz.” For this conjunctionto be true, both conditions given must be true. It is false when one or both of these conditionsare false. ◂ Definition 3 Letpandqbe propositions. The disjunction ofpandq, denoted by p∨q, is the proposition “porq.” The disjunction p∨qis false when both pandqare false and is true otherwise. Table 3 displays the truth table for p∨q. TABLE 2 The Truth Table for the Conjunction of Two Propositions. pq p∧q TT T TF F FT F FF FTABLE 3 T h eT r u t hT a b l ef o r the Disjunction of TwoPropositions. pq p∨q TT T TF T FT T FF F

=== PDF Page 5 | Book Page 5 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 5 The use of the connective orin a disjunction corresponds to one of the two ways the word oris used in English, namely, as an inclusive or . A disjunction is true when at least one of the two propositions is true. That is, p∨qis true when both pandqare true or when exactly one ofpandqis true. EXAMPLE 6 Translate the statement “Students who have taken calculus or introductory computer science can take this class” in a statement in propositional logic using the propositions p: “A student who has taken calculus can take this class” and q: “A student who has taken introductory computer science can take this class.” Solution: We assume that this statement means that students who have taken both calculus and introductory computer science can take the class, as well as the students who have taken only one of the two subjects. Hence, this statement can be expressed as p∨q, the inclusive or, or disjunction, of pandq. ◂ EXAMPLE 7 What is the disjunction of the propositions pandq, where pandqare the same propositions as in Example 5? Solution: The disjunction of pandq,p∨q, is the propositionExtra Examples “Rebecca’s PC has at least 16 GB free hard disk space, or the processor in Rebecca’s PC runs faster than 1 GHz.” This proposition is true when Rebecca’s PC has at least 16 GB free hard disk space, when the PC’s processor runs faster than 1 GHz, and when both conditions are true. It is false when both of these conditions are false, that is, when Rebecca’s PC has less than 16 GB free hard disk space and the processor in her PC runs at 1 GHz or slower. ◂ Besides its use in disjunctions, the connective oris also used to express an exclusive or . Unlike the disjunction of two propositions pandq, the exclusive or of these two propositions is true when exactly one of pandqis true; it is false when both pandqare true (and when both are false). Definition 4 Letpandqbe propositions. The exclusive or ofpandq, denoted by p⊕q(orpXOR q), is the proposition that is true when exactly one of pandqis true and is false otherwise. Source: Library of Congress Washington, D.C. 20540 USA [LC-USZ62-61664]GEORGE BOOLE (1815–1864) George Boole, the son of a cobbler, was born in Lincoln, England, inLinks November 1815. Because of his family’s difficult financial situation, Boole struggled to educate himself while supporting his family. Nevertheless, he became one of the most important mathematicians of the 1800s. Although he considered a career as a clergyman, he decided instead to go into teaching, and soon afterward opened a school of his own. In his preparation for teaching mathematics, Boole—unsatisfied with textbooks of his day—decided to read the works of the great mathematicians. While reading papers of the great French mathematician Lagrange, Boole made discoveries in the calculus of variations, the branch of analysis dealing with finding curves and surfaces by optimizing certain parameters. In 1848 Boole published The Mathematical Analysis of Logic , the first of his contributions to symbolic logic. In 1849 he was appointed professor of mathematics at Queen’s College in Cork, Ireland. In 1854 he published The Laws of Thought , his most famous work. In this book, Boole introduced what is now called Boolean algebra in his honor. Boole wrote textbooks on differential equations and on difference equations that were used in Great Britain until the end of the nineteenth century. Boole married in 1855; his wife was the niece of the professor of Greek at Queen’s College. In 1864 Boole died from pneumonia, which he contracted as a result of keeping a lecture engagement even though he was soaking wet from a rainstorm.

=== PDF Page 6 | Book Page 61 ===
61 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs The truth table for the exclusive or of two propositions is displayed in Table 4. EXAMPLE 8 Letpandqbe the propositions that state “A student can have a salad with dinner” and “A student can have soup with dinner,” respectively. What is p⊕q, the exclusive or of pandq? Solution: The exclusive or of pandqis the statement that is true when exactly one of pand qis true. That is, p⊕qis the statement “A student can have soup or salad, but not both, with dinner.” Note that this is often stated as “A student can have soup or a salad with dinner,” without explicitly stating that taking both is not permitted. ◂ EXAMPLE 9 Express the statement “I will use all my savings to travel to Europe or to buy an electric car” inpropositional logic using the statement p: “I will use all my savings to travel to Europe” and the statement q: “I will use all my savings to buy an electric car.” Solution: To translate this statement, we first note that the or in this statement must be an exclusive or because this student can either use all his or her savings to travel to Europe or use allthese savings to buy an electric car, but cannot both go to Europe and buy an electric car. (Thisis clear because either option requires all his savings.) Hence, this statement can be expressedasp⊕q. ◂ 1.1.3 Conditional Statements We will discuss several other important ways in which propositions can be combined. Definition 5 Letpandqbe propositions. The conditional statement p →qis the proposition “if p, then q.” The conditional statement p→qis false when pis true and qis false, and true otherwise. In the conditional statement p→q,pis called the hypothesis (orantecedent orpremise) and qis called the conclusion (orconsequence ). The statement p→qis called a conditional statement because p→qasserts that qis trueAssessmenton the condition that pholds. A conditional statement is also called an implication. The truth table for the conditional statement p→qis shown in Table 5. Note that the statement p→qis true when both pandqare true and when pis false (no matter what truth value qhas). TABLE 4 The Truth Table for the Exclusive Or of Two Propositions. pq p⊕q TT F TF T FT T FF FTABLE 5 T h eT r u t hT a b l ef o r the Conditional Statementp→q. pq p→q TT T TF F FT T FF T

=== PDF Page 7 | Book Page 7 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 7 Because conditional statements play such an essential role in mathematical reasoning, a variety of terminology is used to express p→q. You will encounter most if not all of the following ways to express this conditional statement: “ifp, then q”“ pimplies q” “ifp,q”“ ponly if q” “pis sufficient for q” “a sufficient condition for qisp” “qifp”“ qwhenever p” “qwhen p”“ qis necessary for p” “a necessary condition for pisq”“ qfollows from p” “qunless¬p”“ qprovided that p” A useful way to understand the truth value of a conditional statement is to think of an obligation or a contract. For example, the pledge many politicians make when running for office is “If I am elected, then I will lower taxes.” If the politician is elected, voters would expect this politician to lower taxes. Furthermore, if the politician is not elected, then voters will not have any expectation that this person will lowertaxes, although the person may have sufficient influence to cause those in power to lower taxes.It is only when the politician is elected but does not lower taxes that voters can say that thepolitician has broken the campaign pledge. This last scenario corresponds to the case when pis true but qis false in p→q. Similarly, consider a statement that a professor might make: “If you get 100% on the final, then you will get an A.” If you manage to get 100% on the final, then you would expect to receive an A. If you do not get 100%, you may or may not receive an A depending on other factors. However, if you do get100%, but the professor does not give you an A, you will feel cheated. Remark: Because some of the different ways to express the implication pimplies qcan be confusing, we will provide some extra guidance. To remember that “ ponly if q” expresses the same thing as “if p, then q,” note that “p only if q” says that pcannot be true when qis not true. That is, the statement is false if pis true, but qis false. When pis false, qmay be either true or false, because the statement says nothing about the truth value of q. For example, suppose your professor tells you “You can receive an A in the course only if your score on the final is at least 90%.” Then, if you receive an A in the course, then you know that your score on the final is at least 90%. If you do not receive an A, you may or may not have scored at least 90% on the final. Be careful not to use “q only if p” to express p→qbecause this is incorrect. The word “only” plays an essential role here. To see this, note that the truth values of “ qonly if p” and p→qare different when pandqhave different truth values. To see why “q is necessary for p” is equivalent to “if p, then q,” observe that “q is necessary for p” means that pcannot be true unless qis true, or that if qis false, then pis false. This is the same as saying that if pis true, then qis true. To see why “p is sufficient for q” is equivalent to “if p, then q,” note that “p is sufficient for q” means if pis true, it must be the case that qis also true. This is the same as saying that if pis true, then qis also true. You might have trouble understanding how“unless” is used inconditional statementsunless you read thisparagraph carefully. To remember that “ qunless¬p” expresses the same conditional statement as “if p, then q,” note that “q unless¬p” means that if ¬pis false, then qmust be true. That is, the statement “q unless¬p” is false when pis true but qis false, but it is true otherwise. Consequently, “qunless¬p” and p→qalways have the same truth value.

=== PDF Page 8 | Book Page 81 ===
81 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs We illustrate the translation between conditional statements and English statements in Example 10. EXAMPLE 10 Letpbe the statement “Maria learns discrete mathematics” and qthe statement “Maria will find a good job.” Express the statement p→qas a statement in English. Solution: From the definition of conditional statements, we see that when pis the statementExtra Examples “Maria learns discrete mathematics” and qis the statement “Maria will find a good job,” p→q represents the statement “If Maria learns discrete mathematics, then she will find a good job.” There are many other ways to express this conditional statement in English. Among the most natural of these are “Maria will find a good job when she learns discrete mathematics.” “For Maria to get a good job, it is sufficient for her to learn discrete mathematics.” and “Maria will find a good job unless she does not learn discrete mathematics.” ◂ Note that the way we have defined conditional statements is more general than the meaning attached to such statements in the English language. For instance, the conditional statement in Example 10 and the statement “If it is sunny, then we will go to the beach” are statements used in normal language where there is a relationship between the hypothesisand the conclusion. Further, the first of these statements is true unless Maria learns discretemathematics, but she does not get a good job, and the second is true unless it is indeed sunny,but we do not go to the beach. On the other hand, the statement “If Juan has a smartphone, then 2 +3=5” is true from the definition of a conditional statement, because its conclusion is true. (The truthvalue of the hypothesis does not matter then.) The conditional statement “If Juan has a smartphone, then 2 +3=6” is true if Juan does not have a smartphone, even though 2 +3=6 is false. We would not use these last two conditional statements in natural language (except perhaps in sarcasm), becausethere is no relationship between the hypothesis and the conclusion in either statement. In math-ematical reasoning, we consider conditional statements of a more general sort than we use inEnglish. The mathematical concept of a conditional statement is independent of a cause-and-effect relationship between hypothesis and conclusion. Our definition of a conditional statementspecifies its truth values; it is not based on English usage. Propositional language is an artificiallanguage; we only parallel English usage to make it easy to use and remember. The if-then construction used in many programming languages is different from that used in logic. Most programming languages contain statements such as ifpthen S, where pis a proposition and Sis a program segment (one or more statements to be executed). (Although this looks as if it might be a conditional statement, Sis not a proposition, but rather is a set of executable instructions.) When execution of a program encounters sucha statement, Sis executed if pis true, but Sis not executed if pis false, as illustrated in Example 11.

=== PDF Page 9 | Book Page 9 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 9 EXAMPLE 11 What is the value of the variable xafter the statement if2+2=4then x:=x+1 ifx=0 before this statement is encountered? (The symbol := stands for assignment. The statement x:=x+1 means the assignment of the value of x+1t ox.) Solution: Because 2 +2=4 is true, the assignment statement x:=x+1 is executed. Hence, x has the value 0 +1=1 after this statement is encountered. ◂ CONVERSE, CONTRAPOSITIVE, AND INVERSE We can form some new conditional statements starting with a conditional statement p→q. In particular, there are three related conditional statements that occur so often that they have special names. The proposition q→p is called the converse ofp→q. The contrapositive ofp→qis the proposition ¬q→¬p. The proposition ¬p→¬qis called the inverse ofp→q. We will see that of these three conditional statements formed from p→q, only the contrapositive always has the same truth value asp→q. We first show that the contrapositive, ¬q→¬p, of a conditional statement p→qalways has the same truth value as p→q. To see this, note that the contrapositive is false only when ¬p is false and ¬qis true, that is, only when pis true and qis false. We now show that neither the converse, q→p, nor the inverse, ¬p→¬q, has the same truth value as p→qfor all possible truth values of pandq. Note that when pis true and qis false, the original conditional statement is false, but the converse and the inverse are both true.Remember that the contrapositive, butneither the converse orinverse, of a conditionalstatement is equivalentto it.When two compound propositions always have the same truth values, regardless of the truth values of its propositional variables, we call them equivalent. Hence, a conditional statement and its contrapositive are equivalent. The converse and the inverse of a conditional statement are also equivalent, as the reader can verify, but neither is equivalent to the original conditionalstatement. (We will study equivalent propositions in Section 1.3.) Take note that one of the mostcommon logical errors is to assume that the converse or the inverse of a conditional statementis equivalent to this conditional statement. We illustrate the use of conditional statements in Example 12. EXAMPLE 12 Find the contrapositive, the converse, and the inverse of the conditional statement Extra Examples“The home team wins whenever it is raining.” Solution: Because “q whenever p” is one of the ways to express the conditional statement p→q, the original statement can be rewritten as “If it is raining, then the home team wins.” Consequently, the contrapositive of this conditional statement is “If the home team does not win, then it is not raining.” The converse is “If the home team wins, then it is raining.” The inverse is “If it is not raining, then the home team does not win.” Only the contrapositive is equivalent to the original statement. ◂

=== PDF Page 10 | Book Page 10 ===
10 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs TABLE 6 The Truth Table for the Biconditional p↔q. pq p↔q TT T TF F FT F FF T BICONDITIONALS We now introduce another way to combine propositions that expresses that two propositions have the same truth value. Definition 6 Letpandqbe propositions. The biconditional statement p ↔qis the proposition “p if and only if q.” The biconditional statement p↔qis true when pandqhave the same truth values, and is false otherwise. Biconditional statements are also called bi-implications . The truth table for p↔qis shown in Table 6. Note that the statement p↔qis true when both the conditional statements p→qandq→pare true and is false otherwise. That is why we use the words “if and only if” to express this logical connective and why it is symbolically written by combining the symbols →and←. There are some other common ways to express p↔q: “pis necessary and sufficient for q” “ifpthen q, and conversely” “piffq.” “pexactly when q.” The last way of expressing the biconditional statement p↔quses the abbreviation “iff” for “if and only if.” Note that p↔qhas exactly the same truth value as (p →q)∧(q→p). EXAMPLE 13 Letpbe the statement “You can take the flight,” and let qbe the statement “You buy a ticket.” Then p↔qis the statement “You can take the flight if and only if you buy a ticket.” This statement is true if pandqare either both true or both false, that is, if you buy a ticket andExtra Examples can take the flight or if you do not buy a ticket and you cannot take the flight. It is false when pandqhave opposite truth values, that is, when you do not buy a ticket, but you can take the flight (such as when you get a free trip) and when you buy a ticket but you cannot take the flight(such as when the airline bumps you). ◂ IMPLICIT USE OF BICONDITIONALS You should be aware that biconditionals are not always explicit in natural language. In particular, the “if and only if” construction used inbiconditionals is rarely used in common language. Instead, biconditionals are often expressedusing an “if, then” or an “only if” construction. The other part of the “if and only if” is implicit.That is, the converse is implied, but not stated. For example, consider the statement in English“If you finish your meal, then you can have dessert.” What is really meant is “You can havedessert if and only if you finish your meal.” This last statement is logically equivalent to thetwo statements “If you finish your meal, then you can have dessert” and “You can have dessertonly if you finish your meal.” Because of this imprecision in natural language, we need tomake an assumption whether a conditional statement in natural language implicitly includes itsconverse. Because precision is essential in mathematics and in logic, we will always distinguishbetween the conditional statement p→qand the biconditional statement p↔q.

=== PDF Page 11 | Book Page 11 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 11 1.1.4 Truth Tables of Compound Propositions We have now introduced five important logical connectives—conjunction, disjunction, exclusive or, implication, and the biconditional operator—as well as negation. We can use these con-Demonectives to build up complicated compound propositions involving any number of propositionalvariables. We can use truth tables to determine the truth values of these compound propositions,as Example 14 illustrates. We use a separate column to find the truth value of each compoundexpression that occurs in the compound proposition as it is built up. The truth values of thecompound proposition for each combination of truth values of the propositional variables in itis found in the final column of the table. EXAMPLE 14 Construct the truth table of the compound proposition (p∨¬q)→(p∧q). Solution: Because this truth table involves two propositional variables pandq, there are four rows in this truth table, one for each of the pairs of truth values TT, TF, FT, and FF. The first twocolumns are used for the truth values of pandq, respectively. In the third column we find the truth value of ¬q, needed to find the truth value of p∨¬q, found in the fourth column. The fifth column gives the truth value of p∧q. Finally, the truth value of (p ∨¬q)→(p∧q) is found in the last column. The resulting truth table is shown in Table 7. ◂ TABLE 7 T h eT r u t hT a b l eo f( p∨¬ q)→(p∧q). pq ¬q p∨¬ q p∧q (p∨¬ q)→(p∧q) TT F T T T TF T T F F FT F F F T FF T T F F 1.1.5 Precedence of Logical Operators We can construct compound propositions using the negation operator and the logical operatorsdefined so far. We will generally use parentheses to specify the order in which logical operatorsin a compound proposition are to be applied. For instance, ( p∨q)∧(¬r) is the conjunction ofp∨qand¬r. However, to reduce the number of parentheses, we specify that the negation operator is applied before all other logical operators. This means that ¬p∧qis the conjunction of¬pandq, namely, (¬p) ∧q, not the negation of the conjunction of pandq, namely ¬(p∧q). (It is generally the case that unary operators that involve only one object precede binary operators.) Another general rule of precedence is that the conjunction operator takes precedence over the disjunction operator, so that p∨q∧rmeans p∨(q∧r) rather than (p ∨q)∧randp∧q∨r means (p ∧q)∨rrather than p∧(q∨r). Because this rule may be difficult to remember, we will continue to use parentheses so that the order of the disjunction and conjunction operators is clear.TABLE 8 Precedence of Logical Operators. Operator Precedence ¬ 1 ∧ 2 ∨ 3 → 4 ↔ 5Finally, it is an accepted rule that the conditional and biconditional operators, →and↔, have lower precedence than the conjunction and disjunction operators, ∧and∨. Consequently, p→q∨rmeans p→(q∨r) rather than (p →q)∨randp∨q→rmeans (p ∨q)→rrather than p∨(q→r). We will use parentheses when the order of the conditional operator and biconditional operator is at issue, although the conditional operator has precedence over the biconditional operator. Table 8 displays the precedence levels of the logical operators, ¬,∧, ∨,→, and↔.

=== PDF Page 12 | Book Page 12 ===
12 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 1.1.6 Logic and Bit Operations Computers represent information using bits. A bitis a symbol with two possible values, namely, 0 (zero) and 1 (one). This meaning of the word bit comes from binary dig it, because zeros and ones are the digits used in binary representations of numbers. The well-known statistician John Tukey introduced this terminology in 1946. A bit can be used to represent a truth value, because there are two truth values, namely, true andfalse . As is customarily done, we will us ea1b i t to represent true and a 0 bit to represent false. That is, 1 represents T (true), 0 represents F (false). A variable is called a Boolean variable if its value is either true or false. Consequently, Linksa Boolean variable can be represented using a bit.Truth Value Bit T 1 F 0 Computer bit operations correspond to the logical connectives. By replacing true by a one and false by a zero in the truth tables for the operators ∧,∨, and⊕, the columns in Table 9 for the corresponding bit operations are obtained. We will also use the notation OR,AND , and XOR for the operators ∨,∧, and⊕, as is done in various programming languages. TABLE 9 Table for the Bit Operators OR, AND, and XOR. x y x∨y x∧y x⊕y 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 Information is often represented using bit strings, which are lists of zeros and ones. When this is done, operations on the bit strings can be used to manipulate this information. Definition 7 Abit string is a sequence of zero or more bits. The length of this string is the number of bits in the string. EXAMPLE 15 101010011 is a bit string of length nine. ◂ c/circlecopyrtAlfred Eisenstaedt/ The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty ImagesJOHN WILDER TUKEY (1915–2000) Tukey, born in New Bedford, Massachusetts, was an only child.Links His parents, both teachers, decided home schooling would best develop his potential. His formal education began at Brown University, where he studied mathematics and chemistry. He received a master’s degree in chemistry from Brown and continued his studies at Princeton University, changing his field of study from chemistry to mathematics. He received his Ph.D. from Princeton in 1939 for work in topology, when he was appointed an instructor in mathematics at Princeton. With the start of World War II, he joined the Fire Control Research Office, where he began working in statistics. Tukey found statistical research to his liking and impressed several leading statisticians with his skills. In 1945, at the conclusion of the war, Tukey returned to the mathematics department at Princeton as a professor of statistics, and he also took a position at AT&T Bell Laboratories. Tukey founded the Statistics Department at Princeton in 1966 and was its first chairman. Tukey made significant contributions to many areas of statistics, including the analysis of variance, the estimation of spectra of time series, inferences about the values of a set of parameters from a single experiment, and the philosophy of statistics. However, he is best known for his invention, with J. W. Cooley, of the fast Fourier transform. In addition to his contributions to statistics, Tukey was noted as a skilled wordsmith; he is credited with coining the terms bitandsoftware . Tukey contributed his insight and expertise by serving on the President’s Science Advisory Committee. He chaired several important committees dealing with the environment, education, and chemicals and health. He also served on committees working on nuclear disarmament. Tukey received many awards, including the National Medal of Science. HISTORICAL NOTE There were several other suggested words for a binary digit, including binit andbigit, that never were widely accepted. The adoption of the word bitmay be due to its meaning as a common English word. For an account of Tukey’s coining of the word bit, see the April 1984 issue of Annals of the History of Computing.

=== PDF Page 13 | Book Page 13 ===
1.1 Propositional Logic 13 We can extend bit operations to bit strings. We define the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR of two strings of the same length to be the strings that have as their bits the OR, AND, and XOR of the corresponding bits in the two strings, respectively. We use the symbols ∨,∧, and⊕to represent the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR operations, respectively. We illustrate bitwise operations on bit strings with Example 16. EXAMPLE 16 Find the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR of the bit strings 01 1011 0110 and 11 0001 1101. (Here, and throughout this book, bit strings will be split into blocks of four bits to make them easier to read.) Solution: The bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR of these strings are obtained by taking theOR,AND, and XOR of the corresponding bits, respectively. This gives us 01 1011 0110 11 0001 1101 11 1011 1111 bitwise OR 01 0001 0100 bitwise AND 10 1010 1011 bitwise XOR◂ Exercises 1.Which of these sentences are propositions? What are the truth values of those that are propositions? a)Boston is the capital of Massachusetts. b)Miami is the capital of Florida. c)2+3=5. d)5+7=10. e)x+2=11. f)Answer this question. 2.Which of these are propositions? What are the truth values of those that are propositions? a)Do not pass go. b)What time is it? c)There are no black flies in Maine. d)4+x=5. e)The moon is made of green cheese. f)2n≥100. 3.What is the negation of each of these propositions?a)Linda is younger than Sanjay. b)Mei makes more money than Isabella. c)Moshe is taller than Monica. d)Abby is richer than Ricardo. 4.What is the negation of each of these propositions?a)Janice has more Facebook friends than Juan. b)Quincy is smarter than Venkat. c)Zelda drives more miles to school than Paola. d)Briana sleeps longer than Gloria. 5.What is the negation of each of these propositions?a)Mei has an MP3 player. b)There is no pollution in New Jersey. c)2+1=3. d)The summer in Maine is hot and sunny. 6.What is the negation of each of these propositions?a)Jennifer and Teja are friends. b)There are 13 items in a baker’s dozen.c)Abby sent more than 100 text messages yesterday. d)121 is a perfect square. 7.What is the negation of each of these propositions?a)Steve has more than 100 GB free disk space on his laptop. b)Zach blocks e-mails and texts from Jennifer. c)7⋅11⋅13=999. d)Diane rode her bicycle 100 miles on Sunday. 8.Suppose that Smartphone A has 256 MB RAM and 32 GB ROM, and the resolution of its camera is 8 MP; Smartphone B has 288 MB RAM and 64 GB ROM, and the resolution of its camera is 4 MP; and Smartphone C has 128 MB RAM and 32 GB ROM, and the resolution of its camera is 5 MP. Determine the truth value of eachof these propositions. a)Smartphone B has the most RAM of these three smartphones. b)Smartphone C has more ROM or a higher resolutioncamera than Smartphone B. c)Smartphone B has more RAM, more ROM, and a higher resolution camera than Smartphone A. d)If Smartphone B has more RAM and more ROM than Smartphone C, then it also has a higher resolutioncamera. e)Smartphone A has more RAM than Smartphone B ifand only if Smartphone B has more RAM than Smart-phone A. 9.Suppose that during the most recent fiscal year, the annual revenue of Acme Computer was 138 billion dollars and its net profit was 8 billion dollars, the annual revenueof Nadir Software was 87 billion dollars and its net profit was 5 billion dollars, and the annual revenue of Quixote Media was 111 billion dollars and its net profit was13 billion dollars. Determine the truth value of each of these propositions for the most recent fiscal year.
