=== PDF Page 1 | Book Page 26 ===
26 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs blue one. The violinist drinks orange juice. The fox is in a house next to that of the physician. The horse is in a house next to that of the diplomat. [ Hint: Make a table where the rows represent the men and columns represent the color of their houses, their jobs, their pets, and their favorite drinks and use logical reasoning to determine thecorrect entries in the table.] 43.Freedonia has 50 senators. Each senator is either honestor corrupt. Suppose you know that at least one of theFreedonian senators is honest and that, given any two Freedonian senators, at least one is corrupt. Based on these facts, can you determine how many Freedonian senators arehonest and how many are corrupt? If so, what is the answer? 44.Find the output of each of these combinatorial circuits. qppqpa) b)45.Find the output of each of these combinatorial circuits. rqp rpqpa) b) 46.Construct a combinatorial circuit using inverters,OR gates, and AND gates that produces the output(p∧¬r)∨(¬q∧r)f r o mi n p u tb i t sp, q,a n d r. 47.Construct a combinatorial circuit using inverters, OR gates, and AND gates that produces the output ((¬p∨¬r)∧¬q)∨(¬p∧(q∨r)) from input bits p,q, andr. 1.3 Propositional Equivalences 1.3.1 Introduction An important type of step used in a mathematical argument is the replacement of a statement with another statement with the same truth value. Because of this, methods that produce propo-sitions with the same truth value as a given compound proposition are used extensively in theconstruction of mathematical arguments. Note that we will use the term “compound proposi-tion” to refer to an expression formed from propositional variables using logical operators, suchasp∧q. We begin our discussion with a classification of compound propositions according to their possible truth values. Definition 1 A compound proposition that is always true, no matter what the truth values of the proposi-tional variables that occur in it, is called a tautology . A compound proposition that is always false is called a contradiction. A compound proposition that is neither a tautology nor a contradiction is called a contingency. Tautologies and contradictions are often important in mathematical reasoning. Example 1 illus-trates these types of compound propositions. EXAMPLE 1 We can construct examples of tautologies and contradictions using just one propositional vari-able. Consider the truth tables of p∨¬pandp∧¬p, shown in Table 1. Because p∨¬pis always true, it is a tautology. Because p∧¬pis always false, it is a contradiction. ◂

=== PDF Page 2 | Book Page 27 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 27 TABLE 1 Examples of a Tautology and a Contradiction. p¬p p∨¬ p p∧¬ p T F T F F T T F 1.3.2 Logical Equivalences Compound propositions that have the same truth values in all possible cases are called logicallyDemoequivalent. We can also define this notion as follows. Definition 2 The compound propositions pandqare called logically equivalent ifp↔qis a tautology. The notation p≡qdenotes that pandqare logically equivalent. Remark: The symbol ≡is not a logical connective, and p≡qis not a compound proposition but rather is the statement that p↔qis a tautology. The symbol ⇔is sometimes used instead of≡to denote logical equivalence. One way to determine whether two compound propositions are equivalent is to use a truth table. In particular, the compound propositions pandqare equivalent if and only if the columns giving their truth values agree. Example 2 illustrates this method to establish an extremely Extra Examples important and useful logical equivalence, namely, that of ¬(p∨q)w i t h¬p ∧¬q. This logical equivalence is one of the two De Morgan laws , shown in Table 2, named after the English mathematician Augustus De Morgan, of the mid-nineteenth century. TABLE 2 De Morgan’s Laws. ¬(p∧q)≡¬p∨¬q ¬(p∨q)≡¬p∧¬q EXAMPLE 2 Show that ¬(p∨q) and¬p∧¬qare logically equivalent. Solution: The truth tables for these compound propositions are displayed in Table 3. Because the truth values of the compound propositions ¬(p∨q) and¬p∧¬qagree for all possible combinations of the truth values of pandq, it follows that ¬(p∨q)↔(¬p∧¬q) is a tautology and that these compound propositions are logically equivalent. ◂ TABLE 3 Truth Tables for ¬(p∨q)a n d¬p∧¬ q. pq p∨q¬(p∨q)¬p ¬q ¬p∧¬ q TT T F F F F TF T F F T F FT T F T F F FF F T T T T

=== PDF Page 3 | Book Page 28 ===
28 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs The next example establishes an extremely important equivalence. It allows us to replace conditional statements with negations and disjunctions. EXAMPLE 3 Show that p→qand¬p∨qare logically equivalent. (This is known as the conditionaldisjunction equivalence.) Solution: We construct the truth table for these compound propositions in Table 4. Because the truth values of ¬p∨qandp→qagree, they are logically equivalent. ◂ TABLE 4 Truth Tables for ¬p∨qand p→q. pq ¬p ¬p∨q p→q TT F T T TF F F F FT T T T FF T T T We will now establish a logical equivalence of two compound propositions involving three different propositional variables p,q, and r. To use a truth table to establish such a logical equivalence, we need eight rows, one for each possible combination of truth values of these three variables. We symbolically represent these combinations by listing the truth values of p, q, and r, respectively. These eight combinations of truth values are TTT, TTF, TFT, TFF, FTT, FTF, FFT, and FFF; we use this order when we display the rows of the truth table. Note that weneed to double the number of rows in the truth tables we use to show that compound propositionsare equivalent for each additional propositional variable, so that 16 rows are needed to establishthe logical equivalence of two compound propositions involving four propositional variables,and so on. In general, 2 nrows are required if a compound proposition involves npropositional variables. Because of the rapid growth of 2n, more efficient ways are needed to establish logical equivalences, such as by using ones we already know. This technique will be discussed later. EXAMPLE 4 Show that p∨(q∧r) and (p∨q)∧(p∨r) are logically equivalent. This is the distributive law of disjunction over conjunction. Solution: We construct the truth table for these compound propositions in Table 5. Because the truth values of p∨(q∧r) and (p∨q)∧(p∨r) agree, these compound propositions are logically equivalent. ◂ TABLE 5 A Demonstration That p∨(q∧r)a n d( p∨q)∧(p∨r) Are Logically Equivalent. pqr q∧r p∨(q∧r) p∨q p∨r (p∨q)∧(p∨r) TTT T T T T T TTF F T T T T TFT F T T T T TFF F T T T T FTT T T T T T FTF F F T F F FFT F F F T F FFF F F F F F

=== PDF Page 4 | Book Page 29 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 29 TABLE 6 Logical Equivalences. Equivalence Name p∧T≡p Identity laws p∨F≡p p∨T≡T Domination laws p∧F≡F p∨p≡p Idempotent laws p∧p≡p ¬(¬p) ≡p Double negation law p∨q≡q∨p Commutative laws p∧q≡q∧p (p∨q)∨r≡p∨(q∨r) Associative laws (p∧q)∧r≡p∧(q∧r) p∨(q∧r)≡(p∨q)∧(p∨r) Distributive laws p∧(q∨r)≡(p∧q)∨(p∧r) ¬(p∧q)≡¬p∨¬q De Morgan’s laws ¬(p∨q)≡¬p∧¬q p∨(p∧q)≡p Absorption laws p∧(p∨q)≡p p∨¬p≡T Negation laws p∧¬p≡F The identities in Table 6 are a special case ofBoolean algebraidentities found in Table5 of Section 12.1. SeeTable 1 in Section 2.2for analogous setidentities.Table 6 contains some important equivalences. In these equivalences, Tdenotes the compound proposition that is always true and Fdenotes the compound proposition that is always false. We also display some useful equivalences for compound propositions involving conditional statements and biconditional statements in Tables 7 and 8, respectively. The reader isasked to verify the equivalences in Tables 6–8 in the exercises. TABLE 7 Logical Equivalences Involving Conditional Statements. p→q≡¬p∨q p→q≡¬q→¬p p∨q≡¬p→q p∧q≡¬(p→¬q) ¬(p→q)≡p∧¬q (p→q)∧(p→r)≡p→(q∧r) (p→r)∧(q→r)≡(p∨q)→r (p→q)∨(p→r)≡p→(q∨r) (p→r)∨(q→r)≡(p∧q)→rTABLE 8 Logical Equivalences InvolvingBiconditional Statements. p↔q≡(p→q)∧(q→p) p↔q≡¬p↔¬q p↔q≡(p∧q)∨(¬p∧¬q) ¬(p↔q)≡p↔¬q

=== PDF Page 5 | Book Page 30 ===
30 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Be careful not to apply logical identities, such as associative laws,distributive laws, or DeMorgan’s laws, toexpressions that have amix of conjunctions anddisjunctions when theidentities only applywhen all these operatorsare the same.The associative law for disjunction shows that the expression p∨q∨ris well defined, in the sense that it does not matter whether we first take the disjunction of pwith qand then the disjunction of p∨qwith r, or if we first take the disjunction of qandrand then take the disjunction of pwith q∨r. Similarly, the expression p∧q∧ris well defined. By extending this reasoning, it follows that p1∨p2∨⋯∨pnandp1∧p2∧⋯∧pnare well defined whenever p1,p2,…,pnare propositions. Furthermore, note that De Morgan’s laws extend to ¬(p1∨p2∨⋯∨pn)≡(¬p1∧¬p2∧⋯∧¬pn) and ¬(p1∧p2∧⋯∧pn)≡(¬p1∨¬p2∨⋯∨¬pn). We will sometimes use the notation⋁n j=1pjforp1∨p2∨⋯∨pnand⋀nj=1pjfor p1∧p2∧⋯∧pn. Using this notation, the extended version of De Morgan’s laws can be written concisely as ¬(⋁nj=1pj)≡⋀nj=1¬pjand¬(⋀nj=1pj)≡⋁nj=1¬pj. (Methods for proving these identities will be given in Section 5.1.) A truth table with 2nrows is needed to prove the equivalence of two compound propositions innvariables. (Note that the number of rows doubles for each additional propositional variable added. See Chapter 6 for details about solving counting problems such as this.) Because 2n grows extremely rapidly as nincreases (see Section 3.2), the use of truth tables to establish equivalences becomes impractical as the number of variables grows. It is quicker to use other methods, such as employing logical equivalences that we already know. How that can be doneis discussed later in this section. 1.3.3 Using De Morgan’s Laws The two logical equivalences known as De Morgan’s laws are particularly important. They tellWhen using De Morgan’s laws,remember to changethe logical connectiveafter you negate.us how to negate conjunctions and how to negate disjunctions. In particular, the equivalence ¬(p∨q)≡¬p∧¬qtells us that the negation of a disjunction is formed by taking the conjunction of the negations of the component propositions. Similarly, the equivalence ¬(p∧q)≡¬p∨¬q tells us that the negation of a conjunction is formed by taking the disjunction of the negationsof the component propositions. Example 5 illustrates the use of De Morgan’s laws. EXAMPLE 5 Use De Morgan’s laws to express the negations of “Miguel has a cellphone and he has a laptopcomputer” and “Heather will go to the concert or Steve will go to the concert.” Solution: Letpbe “Miguel has a cellphone” and qbe “Miguel has a laptop computer.” Then Assessment“Miguel has a cellphone and he has a laptop computer” can be represented by p∧q.B yt h e first of De Morgan’s laws, ¬(p∧q) is equivalent to ¬p∨¬q. Consequently, we can express the negation of our original statement as “Miguel does not have a cellphone or he does not have a laptop computer.” Letrbe “Heather will go to the concert” and sbe “Steve will go to the concert.” Then “Heather will go to the concert or Steve will go to the concert” can be represented by r∨s.B y the second of De Morgan’s laws, ¬(r∨s) is equivalent to ¬r∧¬s. Consequently, we can express the negation of our original statement as “Heather will not go to the concert and Steve will notgo to the concert.” ◂

=== PDF Page 6 | Book Page 31 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 31 1.3.4 Constructing New Logical Equivalences The logical equivalences in Table 6, as well as any others that have been established (such as those shown in Tables 7 and 8), can be used to construct additional logical equivalences. The reason for this is that a proposition in a compound proposition can be replaced by a compound proposition that is logically equivalent to it without changing the truth value of the original compound proposition. This technique is illustrated in Examples 6–8, where we also use the fact that if pandqare logically equivalent and qandrare logically equivalent, then pandrare logically equivalent (see Exercise 60). EXAMPLE 6 Show that ¬(p→q) and p∧¬qare logically equivalent. Solution: We could use a truth table to show that these compound propositions are equivalent (similar to what we did in Example 4). Indeed, it would not be hard to do so. However, we wantExtra Examples to illustrate how to use logical identities that we already know to establish new logical identities, something that is of practical importance for establishing equivalences of compound propositions with a large number of variables. So, we will establish this equivalence by developing a series of logical equivalences, using one of the equivalences in Table 6 at a time, starting with ¬(p→q) and ending with p∧¬q. We have the following equivalences. ¬(p→q)≡¬(¬p∨q) by the conditional-disjunction equivalence (Example 3) ≡¬(¬p)∧¬q by the second De Morgan law ≡p∧¬q by the double negation law ◂ EXAMPLE 7 Show that ¬(p∨(¬p∧q)) and¬p∧¬qare logically equivalent by developing a series of logical equivalences. Solution: We will use one of the equivalences in Table 6 at a time, starting with ¬(p∨(¬p∧q)) and ending with ¬p∧¬q.(Note: we could also easily establish this equivalence using a truth table.) We have the following equivalences. c/circlecopyrtBettmann/Getty ImagesAUGUSTUS DE MORGAN (1806–1871) Augustus De Morgan was born in India, where his father was aLinks colonel in the Indian army. De Morgan’s family moved to England when he was 7 months old. He attended private schools, where in his early teens he developed a strong interest in mathematics. De Morgan studied at Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating in 1827. Although he considered medicine or law, he decided on mathematics for his career. He won a position at University College, London, in 1828, but resigned after the college dismissed a fellow professor without giving reasons. However, he resumed this position in 1836 when his successor died, remaining until 1866. De Morgan was a noted teacher who stressed principles over techniques. His students included many famous mathematicians, including Augusta Ada, Countess of Lovelace, who was Charles Babbage’s collaborator in his work on computing machines (see page 32 for biographical notes on Augusta Ada). (De Morgan cautioned the countess against studying too much mathematics, because it might interfere with her childbearing abilities!) De Morgan was an extremely prolific writer, publishing more than 1000 articles in more than 15 periodicals. De Morgan also wrote textbooks on many subjects, including logic, probability, calculus, and algebra. In 1838 he presented what was perhaps the first clear explanation of an important proof technique known as mathematical induction (discussed in Section 5.1 of this text), a term he coined. In the 1840s De Morgan made fundamental contributions to the development of symbolic logic. He invented notations that helped him prove propositional equivalences, such as the laws that are named after him. In 1842 De Morgan presented what is considered to be the first precise definition of a limit and developed new tests for convergence of infinite series. De Morgan was also interested in the history of mathematics and wrote biographies of Newton and Halley. In 1837 De Morgan married Sophia Frend, who wrote his biography in 1882. De Morgan’s research, writing, and teaching left little time for his family or social life. Nevertheless, he was noted for his kindness, humor, and wide range of knowledge.

=== PDF Page 7 | Book Page 32 ===
32 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs ¬(p∨(¬p∧q))≡¬p∧¬(¬p∧q) by the second De Morgan law ≡¬p∧[¬(¬p)∨¬q] by the first De Morgan law ≡¬p∧(p∨¬q) by the double negation law ≡(¬p∧p)∨(¬p∧¬q)by the second distributive law ≡F∨(¬p∧¬q) because¬p∧p≡F ≡(¬p∧¬q)∨F by the commutative law for disjunction ≡¬p∧¬q by the identity law for F Consequently ¬(p∨(¬p∧q)) and¬p∧¬qare logically equivalent. ◂ EXAMPLE 8 Show that ( p∧q)→(p∨q) is a tautology. Solution: To show that this statement is a tautology, we will use logical equivalences to demonstrate that it is logically equivalent to T.(Note: This could also be done using a truth table.) (p∧q)→(p∨q)≡¬(p∧q)∨(p∨q) by Example 3 ≡(¬p∨¬q)∨(p∨q)b yt h efi r s tD eM o r g a nl a w ≡(¬p∨p)∨(¬q∨q)by the associative and commutative laws for disjunction ≡T∨T by Example 1 and the commutative law for disjunction ≡T by the domination law ◂ c/circlecopyrtHulton Archive/Getty ImagesAUGUSTA ADA, COUNTESS OF LOVELACE (1815–1852) Augusta Ada was the only child from the mar-Links riage of the flamboyant and notorious poet Lord Byron and Lady Byron, Annabella Millbanke, who separated when Ada was 1 month old, because of Lord Byron’s scandalous affair with his half sister. The Lord Byron had quite a reputation, being described by one of his lovers as “mad, bad, and dangerous to know.” Lady Byron was noted for her intellect and had a passion for mathematics; she was called by Lord Byron “The Princess of Parallelograms.” Augusta was raised by her mother, who encouraged her intellectual talents especially in music and mathematics, to counter what Lady Byron considered dangerous poetic tendencies. At this time, women were not allowed to attend universities and could not join learned societies. Nevertheless, Augusta pursued her mathematical studies independently and with mathematicians, including William Frend. She was also encouraged by another female mathematician, Mary Somerville, and in 1834 at a dinner party hosted by Mary Somerville, she learned about Charles Babbage’s ideas for a calculating machine, called the Analytic Engine. In 1838 Augusta Ada married Lord King, later elevated to Earl of Lovelace. Together they had three children. Augusta Ada continued her mathematical studies after her marriage. Charles Babbage had continued work on his Analytic Engine and lectured on this in Europe. In 1842 Babbage asked Augusta Ada to translate an article in French describing Babbage’s invention. When Babbage saw her translation, he suggested she add her own notes, and the resulting work was three times the length of the original. The most complete accounts of the Analytic Engine are found in Augusta Ada’s notes. In her notes, she compared the working of the Analytic Engine to that of the Jacquard loom, with Babbage’s punch cards analogous to the cards used to create patterns on the loom. Furthermore, she recognized the promise of the machine as a general purpose computer much better than Babbage did. She stated that the “engine is the material expression of any indefinite function of any degree of generality and complexity.” Her notes on the Analytic Engine anticipate many future developments, including computer-generated music. Augusta Ada published her writings under her initials A.A.L., concealing her identity as a woman as did many women at a time when women were not considered to be the intellectual equals of men. After 1845 she and Babbage worked toward the development of a system to predict horse races. Unfortunately, their system did not work well, leaving Augusta Ada heavily in debt at the time of her death at an unfortunately young age from uterine cancer. In 1953 Augusta Ada’s notes on the Analytic Engine were republished more than 100 years after they were written, and after they had been long forgotten. In his work in the 1950s on the capacity of computers to think (and his influential Turing test for determining whether a machine is intelligent), Alan Turing responded to Augusta Ada’s statement that “The Analytic Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform.” This “dialogue” between Turing and Augusta Ada is still the subject of controversy. Because of her fundamental contributions to computing, the programming language Ada is named in honor of the Countess of Lovelace.

=== PDF Page 8 | Book Page 33 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 33 1.3.5 Satisfiability A compound proposition is satisfiable if there is an assignment of truth values to its variables that makes it true (that is, when it is a tautology or a contingency). When no such assignments exists, that is, when the compound proposition is false for all assignments of truth values toits variables, the compound proposition is unsatisfiable. Note that a compound proposition is unsatisfiable if and only if its negation is true for all assignments of truth values to the variables,that is, if and only if its negation is a tautology. When we find a particular assignment of truth values that makes a compound proposition true, we have shown that it is satisfiable; such an assignment is called a solution of this particular satisfiability problem. However, to show that a compound proposition is unsatisfiable, we needto show that every assignment of truth values to its variables makes it false. Although we can always use a truth table to determine whether a compound proposition is satisfiable, it is oftenmore efficient not to, as Example 9 demonstrates. EXAMPLE 9 Determine whether each of the compound propositions (p ∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧ (r∨¬p), (p ∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r), and (p ∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧(r∨¬p)∧ (p∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r) is satisfiable. Solution: Instead of using a truth table to solve this problem, we will reason about truth values. Note that (p ∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧(r∨¬p) is true when the three variables p,q, and rhave the same truth value (see Exercise 42 of Section 1.1). Hence, it is satisfiable as there is at leastone assignment of truth values for p,q, and rthat makes it true. Similarly, note that (p ∨q∨ r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r) is true when at least one of p,q, and ris true and at least one is false (see Exercise 43 of Section 1.1). Hence, ( p∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r) is satisfiable, as there is at least one assignment of truth values for p,q, and rthat makes it true. Finally, note that for (p ∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧(r∨¬p)∧(p∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r)t ob e true, (p∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧(r∨¬p) and (p ∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r) must both be true. For the first to be true, the three variables must have the same truth values, and for the sec-ond to be true, at least one of the three variables must be true and at least one must befalse. However, these conditions are contradictory. From these observations we concludethat no assignment of truth values to p,q, and rmakes (p ∨¬q)∧(q∨¬r)∧(r∨¬p)∧ (p∨q∨r)∧(¬p∨¬q∨¬r) true. Hence, it is unsatisfiable. ◂ 1.3.6 Applications of Satisfiability Many problems, in diverse areas such as robotics, software testing, artificial intelligence plan-ning, computer-aided design, machine vision, integrated circuit design, scheduling, computernetworking, and genetics, can be modeled in terms of propositional satisfiability. Although mostapplications are quite complex and beyond the scope of this book, we can illustrate how twopuzzles can be modeled as satisfiability problems. EXAMPLE 10 The n-Queens Problem Then-queens problem asks for a placement of nqueens on an n×n chessboard so that no queen can attack another queen. This means that no two queens can beplaced in the same row, in the same column, or on the same diagonal. We display a solutionto the eight-queens problem in Figure 1. (The eight-queens problem dates back to 1848 whenit was proposed by Max Bezzel and was completely solved by Franz Nauck in 1850. We willreturn to the n-queens problem in Section 11.4.) To model the n-queens problem as a satisfiability problem, we introduce n 2variables, p(i, j) fori=1,2,…,nandj=1,2,…,n. For a given placement of a queens on the chessboard, p(i, j) is true when there is a queen on the square in the ith row and jth column, and is false

=== PDF Page 9 | Book Page 34 ===
34 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs FIGURE 1 otherwise. Note that squares (i, j ) and (i′,j′) are on the same diagonal if either i+i′=j+j′or i−i′=j−j′. In the chessboard in Figure 1, p(6, 2) and p(2, 1) are true, while p(3, 4) and p(5, 4) are false. For no two of the nqueens to be in the same row, there must be one queen in each row. We can show that there is one queen in each row by verifying that every row contains at least one queen and that every row contains at most one queen. We first note that⋁ n j=1p(i, j ) asserts that row icontains at least one queen, and Q1=n⋀ i=1n⋁ j=1p(i, j ) asserts that every row contains at least one queen. For every row to include at most one queen, it must be the case that p(i, j ) and p(k, j )a r e not both true for integers jand kwith 1 ≤j<k≤n. Observe that ¬p(i, j )∨¬ p(i, k ) asserts that at least one of ¬p(i, j ) and¬p(i, k ) is true, which means that at least one of p(i, j ) and p(i, k )i s false. So, to check that there is at most one queen in each row, we assert Q2=n⋀ i=1n−1⋀ j=1n⋀ k=j+1(¬p(i, j )∨¬ p(k, j )). To assert that no column contains more than one queen, we assert that Q3=n⋀ j=1n−1⋀ i=1n⋀ k=i+1(¬p(i, j )∨¬ p(k, j )). (This assertion, together with the previous assertion that every row contains a queen, implies that every column contains a queen.) To assert that no diagonal contains two queens, we assert Q4=n⋀ i=2n−1⋀ j=1min(i−1,n −j)⋀ k=1(¬p(i, j )∨¬ p(i−k, k+j)) and Q5=n−1⋀ i=1n−1⋀ j=1min(n−i,n −j)⋀ k=1(¬p(i, j )∨¬ p(i+k, j+k)).

=== PDF Page 10 | Book Page 35 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 35 The innermost conjunction in Q4and in Q5for a pair (i, j ) runs through the positions on a diagonal that begin at (i, j ) and runs rightward along this diagonal. The upper limits on these innermost conjunctions identify the last cell in the board on each diagonal. Putting all this together, we find that the solutions of the n-queens problem are given by the assignments of truth values to the variables p(i, j),i=1,2,…,nandj=1,2,…,n that make Q=Q1∧Q2∧Q3∧Q4∧Q5 true. Using this and other approaches, the number of ways nqueens can be placed on a chessboard so that no queen can attack another has been computed for n≤27. When n=8 there are 92 such placements, while for n=16 this number grows to 14,772,512. (See the OEIS discussed in Section 2.4 for details.) ◂ EXAMPLE 11 Sudoku Sudoku puzzles are constructed using a 9 ×9 grid made up of nine 3 ×3 subgrids, known as blocks , as shown in Figure 2. For each puzzle, some of the 81 cells, called givens, are assigned one of the numbers 1, 2,…,9, and the other cells are blank. The puzzle is solved by assigning a number to each blank cell so that every row, every column, and every one of the nine 3×3 blocks contains each of the nine possible numbers. Note that instead of using a 9 ×9 grid, Sudoku puzzles can be based on n2×n2grids, for any positive integer n, with the n2×n2 grid made up of n2n×nsubgrids. The popularity of Sudoku dates back to the 1980s when it was introduced in Japan. ItLinks took 20 years for Sudoku to spread to rest of the world, but by 2005, Sudoku puzzles were aworldwide craze. The name Sudoku is short for the Japanese suuji wa dokushin ni kagiru, which means “the digits must remain single.” The modern game of Sudoku was apparently designedin the late 1970s by an American puzzle designer. The basic ideas of Sudoku date back evenfurther; puzzles printed in French newspapers in the 1890s were quite similar, but not identical,to modern Sudoku. Sudoku puzzles designed for entertainment have two additional important properties. First, they have exactly one solution. Second, they can be solved using reasoning alone, that is, withoutresorting to searching all possible assignments of numbers to the cells. As a Sudoku puzzle issolved, entries in blank cells are successively determined by already known values. For instance,in the grid in Figure 2, the number 4 must appear in exactly one cell in the second row. Howcan we determine in which of the seven blank cells it must appear? First, we observe that 4cannot appear in one of the first three cells or in one of the last three cells of this row, becauseit already appears in another cell in the block each of these cells is in. We can also see that 4 29 4 51 4 42 67 5 73 5 19 6 FIGURE 2 A9×9 Sudoku puzzle.

=== PDF Page 11 | Book Page 36 ===
36 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs cannot appear in the fifth cell in this row, as it already appears in the fifth column in the fourth row. This means that 4 must appear in the sixth cell of the second row. Many strategies based on logic and mathematics have been devised for solving Sudoku puzzles (see [Da10], for example). Here, we discuss one of the ways that have been devel-oped for solving Sudoku puzzles with the aid of a computer, which depends on modelingthe puzzle as a propositional satisfiability problem. Using the model we describe, particularSudoku puzzles can be solved using software developed to solve satisfiability problems. Cur-rently, Sudoku puzzles can be solved in less than 10 milliseconds this way. It should be notedthat there are many other approaches for solving Sudoku puzzles via computers using othertechniques. To encode a Sudoku puzzle, let p(i, j, n) denote the proposition that is true when the number nis in the cell in the ith row and jth column. There are 9 ×9×9=729 such propositions, as i, j, and nall range from 1 to 9. For example, for the puzzle in Figure 2, the number 6 is given as the value in the fifth row and first column. Hence, we see that p(5,1,6) is true, but p(5,j ,6) is false for j=2,3,…,9. Given a particular Sudoku puzzle, we begin by encoding each of the given values. Then, we construct compound propositions that assert that every row contains every number, everycolumn contains every number, every 3 ×3 block contains every number, and each cell contains no more than one number. It follows, as the reader should verify, that the Sudoku puzzle is solvedby finding an assignment of truth values to the 729 propositions p(i, j, n)w i t h i,j, and neach ranging from 1 to 9 that makes the conjunction of all these compound propositions true. Afterlisting these assertions, we will explain how to construct the assertion that every row containsevery integer from 1 to 9. We will leave the construction of the other assertions that everycolumn contains every number and each of the nine 3 ×3 blocks contains every number to the exercises. ▶For each cell with a given value, we assert p(i, j, n) when the cell in row iand column j has the given value n. ▶We assert that every row contains every number: 9⋀ i=19⋀ n=19⋁ j=1p(i, j, n) ▶We assert that every column contains every number: 9⋀ j=19⋀ n=19⋁ i=1p(i, j, n) It is tricky setting up the two inner indices so thatall nine cells in eachsquare block areexamined.▶We assert that each of the nine 3 ×3 blocks contains every number: 2⋀ r=02⋀ s=09⋀ n=13⋁ i=13⋁ j=1p(3r+i,3s+j, n) ▶To assert that no cell contains more than one number, we take the conjunction over all values of n,n′,i, and j, where each variable ranges from 1 to 9 and n≠n′ofp(i, j, n) → ¬p(i, j, n′). We now explain how to construct the assertion that every row contains every number. First, to assert that row icontains the number n,w ef o r m⋁9 j=1p(i, j, n). To assert that row icontains all nnumbers, we form the conjunction of these disjunctions over all nine possible values of n, giving us⋀9n=1⋁9j=1p(i, j, n). Finally, to assert that every row contains

=== PDF Page 12 | Book Page 37 ===
1.3 Propositional Equivalences 37 every number, we take the conjunction of⋀9 n=1⋁9 j=1p(i, j, n ) over all nine rows. This gives us⋀9 i=1⋀9 n=1⋁9 j=1p(i, j, n ). (Exercises 71 and 72 ask for explanations of the assertions that every column contains every number and that each of the nine 3 ×3 blocks contains every number.) Given a particular Sudoku puzzle, to solve this puzzle we can find a solution to the satisfiability problems that asks for a set of truth values for the 729 variables p(i, j, n ) that makes the conjunction of all the listed assertions true. ◂ 1.3.7 Solving Satisfiability Problems A truth table can be used to determine whether a compound proposition is satisfiable, or equivalently, whether its negation is a tautology (see Exercise 64). This can be done by hand for a compound proposition with a small number of variables, but when the number of variables grows, this becomes impractical. For instance, there are 220=1,048,576 rows in the truth table for a compound proposition with 20 variables. Thus, you need a computer to help you determine, in this way, whether a compound proposition in 20 variables is satisfiable. When many applications are modeled, questions concerning the satisfiability of compound propositions with hundreds, thousands, or millions of variables arise. Note, for example, that when there are 1000 variables, checking every one of the 21000(a number with more than 300 decimal digits) possible combinations of truth values of the variables in a compound proposition cannot be done by a computer in even trillions of years. No procedure is known that a computer can follow to determine in a reasonable amount of time whether an arbitrary compound proposition in such a large number of variables is satisfiable. However, progress has been made developing methods for solving the satisfiability problem for the particular types of compound propositions that arise in practical applications, such as for the solution of Sudoku puzzles. Many computer programs have been developed for solving satisfiability problems which haveLinks practical use. In our discussion of the subject of algorithms in Chapter 3, we will discuss this question further. In particular, we will explain the important role the propositional satisfiability problem plays in the study of the complexity of algorithms. Courtesy of Harvard University Portrait Collection, Department of PhilosophyHENRY MAURICE SHEFFER (1883–1964) Henry Maurice Sheffer, born to Jewish parents in the western Ukraine, emigrated to the United States in 1892 with his parents and six siblings. He studied at the Boston LatinLinks School before entering Harvard, where he completed his undergraduate degree in 1905, his master’s in 1907, and his Ph.D. in philosophy in 1908. After holding a postdoctoral position at Harvard, Henry traveled to Europe on a fellowship. Upon returning to the United States, he became an academic nomad, spending one year each at the University of Washington, Cornell, the University of Minnesota, the University of Missouri, and City College in New York. In 1916 he returned to Harvard as a faculty member in the philosophy department. He remained at Harvard until his retirement in 1952. Sheffer introduced what is now known as the Sheffer stroke in 1913; it became well known only after its use in the 1925 edition of Whitehead and Russell’s Principia Mathematica . In this same edition Russell wrote that Sheffer had invented a powerful method that could be used to simplify the Principia . Because of this comment, Sheffer was something of a mystery man to logicians, especially because Sheffer, who published little in his career, never published the details of this method, only describing it in mimeographed notes and in a brief published abstract. Sheffer was a dedicated teacher of mathematical logic. He liked his classes to be small and did not like auditors. When strangers appeared in his classroom, Sheffer would order them to leave, even his colleagues or distinguished guests visiting Harvard. Sheffer was barely five feet tall; he was noted for his wit and vigor, as well as for his nervousness and irritability. Although widely liked, he was quite lonely. He is noted for a quip he spoke at his retirement: “Old professors never die, they just become emeriti.” Sheffer is also credited with coining the term “Boolean algebra” (the subject of Chapter 12 of this text). Sheffer was briefly married and lived most of his later life in small rooms at a hotel packed with his logic books and vast files of slips of paper he used to jot down his ideas. Unfortunately, Sheffer suffered from severe depression during the last two decades of his life.
