=== PDF Page 1 | Book Page 73 ===
1.6 Rules of Inference 73 1.6 Rules of Inference 1.6.1 Introduction Later in this chapter we will study proofs. Proofs in mathematics are valid arguments that establish the truth of mathematical statements. By an argument, we mean a sequence of statements that end with a conclusion. By valid, we mean that the conclusion, or final statement of the argument, must follow from the truth of the preceding statements, or premises, of the argument. That is, an argument is valid if and only if it is impossible for all the premises to be true andthe conclusion to be false. To deduce new statements from statements we already have, we userules of inference which are templates for constructing valid arguments. Rules of inference areour basic tools for establishing the truth of statements. Before we study mathematical proofs, we will look at arguments that involve only compound propositions. We will define what it means for an argument involving compound propo-sitions to be valid. Then we will introduce a collection of rules of inference in propositionallogic. These rules of inference are among the most important ingredients in producing validarguments. After we illustrate how rules of inference are used to produce valid arguments, wewill describe some common forms of incorrect reasoning, called fallacies, which lead to invalid arguments. After studying rules of inference in propositional logic, we will introduce rules of inference for quantified statements. We will describe how these rules of inference can be usedto produce valid arguments. These rules of inference for statements involving existential anduniversal quantifiers play an important role in proofs in computer science and mathematics,although they are often used without being explicitly mentioned. Finally, we will show how rules of inference for propositions and for quantified statements can be combined. These combinations of rule of inference are often used together in complicatedarguments. 1.6.2 Valid Arguments in Propositional Logic Consider the following argument involving propositions (which, by definition, is a sequence ofpropositions): “If you have a current password, then you can log onto the network.” “You have a current password.” Therefore, “You can log onto the network.” We would like to determine whether this is a valid argument. That is, we would like to determine whether the conclusion “You can log onto the network” must be true when the premises “If you have a current password, then you can log onto the network” and “You have a currentpassword” are both true. Before we discuss the validity of this particular argument, we will look at its form. Use p to represent “You have a current password” and qto represent “You can log onto the network.” Then, the argument has the form p→q p ∴q where∴is the symbol that denotes “therefore.”

=== PDF Page 2 | Book Page 74 ===
74 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs We know that when pandqare propositional variables, the statement (( p→q)∧p)→qis a tautology (see Exercise 12(c) in Section 1.3). In particular, when both p→qandpare true, we know that qmust also be true. We say this form of argument is valid because whenever all its premises (all statements in the argument other than the final one, the conclusion) are true, the conclusion must also be true. Now suppose that both “If you have a current password, thenyou can log onto the network” and “You have a current password” are true statements. Whenwe replace pby “You have a current password” and qby “You can log onto the network,” it necessarily follows that the conclusion “You can log onto the network” is true. This argumentisvalid because its form is valid. Note that whenever we replace pandqby propositions where p→qandpare both true, then qmust also be true. What happens when we replace pandqin this argument form by propositions where not both pandp→qare true? For example, suppose that prepresents “You have access to the network” and qrepresents “You can change your grade” and that pis true, but p→qis false. The argument we obtain by substituting these values of pandqinto the argument form is “If you have access to the network, then you can change your grade.”“You have access to the network.” ∴“You can change your grade.” The argument we obtained is a valid argument, but because one of the premises, namely the firstpremise, is false, we cannot conclude that the conclusion is true. (Most likely, this conclusionis false.) In our discussion, to analyze an argument, we replaced propositions by propositional variables. This changed an argument to an argument form. We saw that the validity of an argument follows from the validity of the form of the argument. We summarize the terminology used todiscuss the validity of arguments with our definition of the key notions. Definition 1 Anargument in propositional logic is a sequence of propositions. All but the final proposition in the argument are called premises and the final proposition is called the conclusion.A n argument is valid if the truth of all its premises implies that the conclusion is true. Anargument form in propositional logic is a sequence of compound propositions involving propositional variables. An argument form is valid if no matter which particular propositions are substituted for the propositional variables in its premises, the conclusion istrue if the premises are all true. Remark: From the definition of a valid argument form we see that the argument form with premises p 1,p2,…,pnand conclusion qis valid exactly when (p1∧p2∧⋯∧pn)→qis a tautology. The key to showing that an argument in propositional logic is valid is to show that its argument form is valid. Consequently, we would like techniques to show that argument formsare valid. We will now develop methods for accomplishing this task. 1.6.3 Rules of Inference for Propositional Logic We can always use a truth table to show that an argument form is valid. We do this by showingthat whenever the premises are true, the conclusion must also be true. However, this can bea tedious approach. For example, when an argument form involves 10 different propositionalvariables, to use a truth table to show this argument form is valid requires 2 10=1024 different rows. Fortunately, we do not have to resort to truth tables. Instead, we can first establish the

=== PDF Page 3 | Book Page 75 ===
1.6 Rules of Inference 75 validity of some relatively simple argument forms, called rules of inference. These rules of inference can be used as building blocks to construct more complicated valid argument forms. We will now introduce the most important rules of inference in propositional logic. The tautology (p ∧(p→q))→qis the basis of the rule of inference called modus ponens, or the law of detachment. (Modus ponens is Latin for mode that affirms.) This tautology leads to the following valid argument form, which we have already seen in our initial discussion aboutarguments (where, as before, the symbol ∴denotes “therefore”): pp→q ∴q Using this notation, the hypotheses are written in a column, followed by a horizontal bar, fol-lowed by a line that begins with the therefore symbol and ends with the conclusion. In particular,modus ponens tells us that if a conditional statement and the hypothesis of this conditional state-ment are both true, then the conclusion must also be true. Example 1 illustrates the use of modusponens. EXAMPLE 1 Suppose that the conditional statement “If it snows today, then we will go skiing” and its hy-pothesis, “It is snowing today,” are true. Then, by modus ponens, it follows that the conclusionof the conditional statement, “We will go skiing,” is true. ◂ As we mentioned earlier, a valid argument can lead to an incorrect conclusion if one or more of its premises is false. We illustrate this again in Example 2. EXAMPLE 2 Determine whether the argument given here is valid and determine whether its conclusion mustbe true because of the validity of the argument. “If√ 2>3 2, then(√ 2)2>( 3 2)2 . We know that√ 2>3 2. Consequently, (√ 2)2=2>( 3 2)2 =9 4.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “√ 2>3 2” and qthe proposition “2 >(3 2)2.” The premises of the argument are p→qandp, and qis its conclusion. This argument is valid because it is constructed by using modus ponens, a valid argument form. However, one of its premises,√ 2>3 2, is false. Consequently, we cannot conclude that the conclusion is true. Furthermore, note that the conclusion of this argument is false, because 2 <9 4. ◂ There are many useful rules of inference for propositional logic. Perhaps the most widely used of these are listed in Table 1. Exercises 13–16, 25, 33, and 34 in Section 1.3 ask for the verifications that these rules of inference are valid argument forms. We now give examples ofarguments that use these rules of inference. In each argument, we first use propositional variablesto express the propositions in the argument. We then show that the resulting argument form isa rule of inference from Table 1. EXAMPLE 3 State which rule of inference is the basis of the following argument: “It is below freezing now.Therefore, it is below freezing or raining now.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “It is below freezing now,” and let qbe the proposition “It is raining now.” Then this argument is of the form p ∴p∨q

=== PDF Page 4 | Book Page 76 ===
76 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs TABLE 1 Rules of Inference. Rule of Inference Tautology Name p p→q ∴q(p∧(p→q))→q Modus ponens ¬qp→q ∴¬p(¬q∧(p→q))→¬p Modus tollens p→q q→r ∴p→r((p→q)∧(q→r))→(p→r) Hypothetical syllogism p∨q ¬p ∴q((p∨q)∧¬p)→q Disjunctive syllogism p ∴p∨qp→(p∨q) Addition p∧q ∴p(p∧q)→p Simplification pq ∴p∧q((p)∧(q))→(p∧q) Conjunction p∨q ¬p∨r ∴q∨r((p∨q)∧(¬p∨r))→(q∨r) Resolution This is an argument that uses the addition rule. ◂ EXAMPLE 4 State which rule of inference is the basis of the following argument: “It is below freezing and raining now. Therefore, it is below freezing now.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “It is below freezing now,” and let qbe the proposition “It is raining now.” This argument is of the form p∧q ∴p This argument uses the simplification rule. ◂ EXAMPLE 5 State which rule of inference is used in the argument: If it rains today, then we will not have a barbecue today. If we do not have a barbecue today, then we will have a barbecue tomorrow. Therefore, if it rains today, then we will have abarbecue tomorrow.

=== PDF Page 5 | Book Page 77 ===
1.6 Rules of Inference 77 Solution: Letpbe the proposition “It is raining today,” let qbe the proposition “We will not have a barbecue today,” and let rbe the proposition “We will have a barbecue tomorrow.” Then this argument is of the form p→q q→r ∴p→r Hence, this argument is a hypothetical syllogism. ◂ 1.6.4 Using Rules of Inference to Build Arguments When there are many premises, several rules of inference are often needed to show that an argument is valid. This is illustrated by Examples 6 and 7, where the steps of arguments aredisplayed on separate lines, with the reason for each step explicitly stated. These examples alsoshow how arguments in English can be analyzed using rules of inference. EXAMPLE 6 Show that the premises “It is not sunny this afternoon and it is colder than yesterday,” “We willgo swimming only if it is sunny,” “If we do not go swimming, then we will take a canoe trip,”and “If we take a canoe trip, then we will be home by sunset” lead to the conclusion “We willbe home by sunset.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “It is sunny this afternoon,” qthe proposition “It is colderExtra Examples than yesterday,” rthe proposition “We will go swimming,” sthe proposition “We will take a canoe trip,” and tthe proposition “We will be home by sunset.” Then the premises become ¬p∧q, r→p,¬r→s,ands→t. The conclusion is simply t. We need to give a valid argument with premises ¬p∧q,r→p,¬r→s, and s→tand conclusion t. We construct an argument to show that our premises lead to the desired conclusion as follows. Step Reason 1.¬p∧q Premise 2.¬p Simplification using (1) 3.r→p Premise 4.¬r Modus tollens using (2) and (3) 5.¬r→s Premise 6.s Modus ponens using (4) and (5) 7.s→t Premise 8.t Modus ponens using (6) and (7) Note that we could have used a truth table to show that whenever each of the four hypotheses is true, the conclusion is also true. However, because we are working with five propositionalvariables, p,q,r,s, and t, such a truth table would have 32 rows. ◂ EXAMPLE 7 Show that the premises “If you send me an e-mail message, then I will finish writing the pro-gram,” “If you do not send me an e-mail message, then I will go to sleep early,” and “If I goto sleep early, then I will wake up feeling refreshed” lead to the conclusion “If I do not finishwriting the program, then I will wake up feeling refreshed.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “You send me an e-mail message,” qthe proposition “I will finish writing the program,” rthe proposition “I will go to sleep early,” and sthe proposition “I

=== PDF Page 6 | Book Page 78 ===
78 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs will wake up feeling refreshed.” Then the premises are p→q,¬p→r,a n d r→s. The desired conclusion is ¬q→s. We need to give a valid argument with premises p→q,¬p→r, and r→sand conclusion ¬q→s. This argument form shows that the premises lead to the desired conclusion. Step Reason 1.p→q Premise 2.¬q→¬p Contrapositive of (1) 3.¬p→r Premise 4.¬q→r Hypothetical syllogism using (2) and (3) 5.r→s Premise 6.¬q→s Hypothetical syllogism using (4) and (5) ◂ 1.6.5 Resolution Computer programs have been developed to automate the task of reasoning and proving theorems. Many of these programs make use of a rule of inference known as resolution. This rule of inference is based on the tautologyLinks ((p∨q)∧(¬p∨r))→(q∨r). (Exercise 34 in Section 1.3 asks for the verification that this is a tautology.) The final disjunctionin the resolution rule, q∨r, is called the resolvent. When we let q=rin this tautology, we obtain (p ∨q)∧(¬p∨q)→q. Furthermore, when we let r=F, we obtain (p ∨q)∧(¬p)→q (because q∨F≡q), which is the tautology on which the rule of disjunctive syllogism is based. EXAMPLE 8 Use resolution to show that the hypotheses “Jasmine is skiing or it is not snowing” and “It issnowing or Bart is playing hockey” imply that “Jasmine is skiing or Bart is playing hockey.” Solution: Letpbe the proposition “It is snowing,” qthe proposition “Jasmine is skiing,” and rthe proposition “Bart is playing hockey.” We can represent the hypotheses as ¬p∨qandp∨Extra Examples r, respectively. Using resolution, the proposition q∨r, “Jasmine is skiing or Bart is playing hockey,” follows. ◂ Resolution plays an important role in programming languages based on the rules of logic, such as Prolog (where resolution rules for quantified statements are applied). Furthermore, it can be used to build automatic theorem proving systems. To construct proofs in propositionallogic using resolution as the only rule of inference, the hypotheses and the conclusion must beexpressed as clauses, where a clause is a disjunction of variables or negations of these variables. We can replace a statement in propositional logic that is not a clause by one or more equivalentstatements that are clauses. For example, suppose we have a statement of the form p∨(q∧r). Because p∨(q∧r)≡(p∨q)∧(p∨r), we can replace the single statement p∨(q∧r)b yt w o statements p∨qandp∨r, each of which is a clause. We can replace a statement of the form ¬(p∨q) by the two statements ¬pand¬qbecause De Morgan’s law tells us that ¬(p∨q)≡ ¬p∧¬q. We can also replace a conditional statement p→qwith the equivalent disjunction ¬p∨q. EXAMPLE 9 Show that the premises ( p∧q)∨randr→simply the conclusion p∨s. Solution: We can rewrite the premises (p ∧q)∨ras two clauses, p∨randq∨r. We can also replace r→sby the equivalent clause ¬r∨s. Using the two clauses p∨rand¬r∨s, we can use resolution to conclude p∨s. ◂

=== PDF Page 7 | Book Page 79 ===
1.6 Rules of Inference 79 1.6.6 Fallacies Several common fallacies arise in incorrect arguments. These fallacies resemble rules of inference, but are based on contingencies rather than tautologies. These are discussed here to showthe distinction between correct and incorrect reasoning. The proposition ((p →q)∧q)→pis not a tautology, because it is false when pis false and qis true. However, there are many incorrect arguments that treat this as a tautology. In other Linkswords, they treat the argument with premises p→qandqand conclusion pas a valid argument form, which it is not. This type of incorrect reasoning is called the fallacy of affirming the conclusion. EXAMPLE 10 Is the following argument valid? If you do every problem in this book, then you will learn discrete mathematics. You learneddiscrete mathematics. Therefore, you did every problem in this book. Solution: Letpbe the proposition “You did every problem in this book.” Let qbe the proposition “You learned discrete mathematics.” Then this argument is of the form: if p→qandq, then p. This is an example of an incorrect argument using the fallacy of affirming the conclusion. Indeed, it is possible for you to learn discrete mathematics in some way other than by doing everyproblem in this book. (You may learn discrete mathematics by reading, listening to lectures,doing some, but not all, the problems in this book, and so on.) ◂ The proposition ((p →q)∧¬p)→¬qis not a tautology, because it is false when pis false andqis true. Many incorrect arguments use this incorrectly as a rule of inference. This type of incorrect reasoning is called the fallacy of denying the hypothesis. EXAMPLE 11 Letpandqbe as in Example 10. If the conditional statement p→qis true, and ¬pis true, is it correct to conclude that ¬qis true? In other words, is it correct to assume that you did not learn discrete mathematics if you did not do every problem in the book, assuming that if you do everyproblem in this book, then you will learn discrete mathematics? Solution: It is possible that you learned discrete mathematics even if you did not do every problem in this book. This incorrect argument is of the form p→qand¬pimply¬q, which is an example of the fallacy of denying the hypothesis. ◂ 1.6.7 Rules of Inference for Quantified Statements We have discussed rules of inference for propositions. We will now describe some important rules of inference for statements involving quantifiers. These rules of inference are used exten-sively in mathematical arguments, often without being explicitly mentioned. Universal instantiation is the rule of inference used to conclude that P(c) is true, where c is a particular member of the domain, given the premise ∀xP(x ). Universal instantiation is used when we conclude from the statement “All women are wise” that “Lisa is wise,” where Lisa isa member of the domain of all women. Universal generalization is the rule of inference that states that ∀xP(x ) is true, given the premise that P(c) is true for all elements cin the domain. Universal generalization is used when we show that ∀xP(x ) is true by taking an arbitrary element cfrom the domain and showing that P(c) is true. The element cthat we select must be an arbitrary, and not a specific, element of the domain. That is, when we assert from ∀xP(x ) the existence of an element cin the domain,

=== PDF Page 8 | Book Page 80 ===
80 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs TABLE 2 Rules of Inference for Quantified Statements. Rule of Inference Name ∀xP(x ) ∴P(c)Universal instantiation P(c) for an arbitrary c ∴∀xP(x )Universal generalization ∃xP(x ) ∴P(c) for some element cExistential instantiation P(c) for some element c ∴∃xP(x )Existential generalization we have no control over cand cannot make any other assumptions about cother than it comes from the domain. Universal generalization is used implicitly in many proofs in mathematics and is seldom mentioned explicitly. However, the error of adding unwarranted assumptions aboutthe arbitrary element cwhen universal generalization is used is all too common in incorrect reasoning. Existential instantiation is the rule that allows us to conclude that there is an element cin the domain for which P(c)i st r u ei fw ek n o wt h a t∃xP(x ) is true. We cannot select an arbitrary value of chere, but rather it must be a cfor which P(c) is true. Usually we have no knowledge of what cis, only that it exists. Because it exists, we may give it a name (c) and continue our argument. Existential generalization is the rule of inference that is used to conclude that ∃xP(x )i s true when a particular element cwith P(c) true is known. That is, if we know one element cin the domain for which P(c) is true, then we know that ∃xP(x ) is true. We summarize these rules of inference in Table 2. We will illustrate how some of these rules of inference for quantified statements are used in Examples 12 and 13. EXAMPLE 12 Show that the premises “Everyone in this discrete mathematics class has taken a course incomputer science” and “Marla is a student in this class” imply the conclusion “Marla has takena course in computer science.” Solution: LetD(x) denote “x is in this discrete mathematics class,” and let C(x) denote “x has taken a course in computer science.” Then the premises are ∀x(D(x)→C(x)) and D(Marla). The conclusion is C(Marla). The following steps can be used to establish the conclusion from the premises.Extra Examples Step Reason 1.∀x(D(x)→C(x)) Premise 2.D(Marla) →C(Marla) Universal instantiation from (1) 3.D(Marla) Premise 4.C(Marla) Modus ponens from (2) and (3)◂ EXAMPLE 13 Show that the premises “A student in this class has not read the book,” and “Everyone in this class passed the first exam” imply the conclusion “Someone who passed the first exam has notread the book.”

=== PDF Page 9 | Book Page 81 ===
1.6 Rules of Inference 81 Solution: LetC(x)b e“ xis in this class,” B(x)b e“ xhas read the book,” and P(x)b e“ xpassed the first exam.” The premises are ∃x(C(x)∧¬B(x)) and∀x(C(x)→P(x)). The conclusion is ∃x(P(x)∧¬B(x)). These steps can be used to establish the conclusion from the premises. Step Reason 1.∃x(C(x)∧¬B(x)) Premise 2.C(a)∧¬B(a) Existential instantiation from (1) 3.C(a) Simplification from (2) 4.∀x(C(x)→P(x)) Premise 5.C(a)→P(a) Universal instantiation from (4) 6.P(a) Modus ponens from (3) and (5) 7.¬B(a) Simplification from (2) 8.P(a)∧¬B(a) Conjunction from (6) and (7) 9.∃x(P(x)∧¬B(x)) Existential generalization from (8) ◂ 1.6.8 Combining Rules of Inference for Propositions and Quantified Statements We have developed rules of inference both for propositions and for quantified statements. Note that in our arguments in Examples 12 and 13 we used both universal instantiation, a rule of in-ference for quantified statements, and modus ponens, a rule of inference for propositional logic.We will often need to use this combination of rules of inference. Because universal instantia-tion and modus ponens are used so often together, this combination of rules is sometimes calleduniversal modus ponens . This rule tells us that if ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)) is true, and if P(a)i st r u e for a particular element ain the domain of the universal quantifier, then Q(a) must also be true. To see this, note that by universal instantiation, P(a)→Q(a) is true. Then, by modus ponens, Q(a) must also be true. We can describe universal modus ponens as follows: ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)) P(a), where ais a particular element in the domain ∴Q(a) Universal modus ponens is commonly used in mathematical arguments. This is illustrated in Example 14. EXAMPLE 14 Assume that “For all positive integers n,i fn is greater than 4, then n2is less than 2n” is true. Use universal modus ponens to show that 1002<2100. Solution: LetP(n) denote “n >4” and Q(n) denote “n2<2n.” The statement “For all positive integers n,i fn is greater than 4, then n2is less than 2n” can be represented by ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)), where the domain consists of all positive integers. We are assuming that ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)) is true. Note that P(100) is true because 100 >4. It follows by universal modus ponens that Q(100) is true, namely, that 1002<2100. ◂ Another useful combination of a rule of inference from propositional logic and a rule of inference for quantified statements is universal modus tollens. Universal modus tollens combines universal instantiation and modus tollens and can be expressed in the following way: ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)) ¬Q(a), where ais a particular element in the domain ∴¬P(a)
