=== PDF Page 1 | Book Page 84 ===
84 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 23.Identify the error or errors in this argument that supposedly shows that if ∃xP(x )∧∃xQ(x )i st r u et h e n ∃x(P(x)∧Q(x)) is true. 1.∃xP(x )∨∃xQ(x )P r e m i s e 2.∃xP(x ) Simplification from (1) 3.P(c) Existential instantiation from (2) 4.∃xQ(x ) Simplification from (1) 5.Q(c) Existential instantiation from (4) 6.P(c)∧Q(c) Conjunction from (3) and (5) 7.∃x(P(x)∧Q(x)) Existential generalization 24.Identify the error or errors in this argument that supposedly shows that if ∀x(P(x)∨Q(x)) is true then ∀xP(x )∨∀xQ(x )i st r u e . 1.∀x(P(x)∨Q(x)) Premise 2.P(c)∨Q(c) Universal instantiation from (1) 3.P(c) Simplification from (2) 4.∀xP(x ) Universal generalization from (3) 5.Q(c) Simplification from (2) 6.∀xQ(x ) Universal generalization from (5) 7.∀x(P(x)∨∀xQ(x )) Conjunction from (4) and (6) 25.Justify the rule of universal modus tollens by showingthat the premises ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)) and¬Q(a)f o rap a r - ticular element ain the domain, imply ¬P(a). 26.Justify the rule of universal transitivity, which states that if∀x(P(x)→Q(x)) and∀x(Q(x)→R(x)) are true, then∀x(P(x)→R(x)) is true, where the domains of all quantifiers are the same. 27.Use rules of inference to show that if ∀x(P(x)→(Q(x)∧ S(x))) and∀x(P(x)∧R(x)) are true, then ∀x(R(x)∧S(x)) is true. 28.Use rules of inference to show that if ∀x(P(x)∨Q(x)) and ∀x((¬P(x )∧Q(x))→R(x)) are true, then ∀x(¬R(x )→ P(x)) is also true, where the domains of all quantifiers are the same. 29.Use rules of inference to show that if ∀x(P(x)∨Q(x)), ∀x(¬Q(x )∨S(x)),∀x(R(x)→¬S(x)), and∃x¬P(x )a r e true, then ∃x¬R(x )i st r u e . 30.Use resolution to show the hypotheses “Allen is a badboy or Hillary is a good girl” and “Allen is a good boy orDavid is happy” imply the conclusion “Hillary is a good girl or David is happy.” 31.Use resolution to show that the hypotheses “It is not raining or Yvette has her umbrella,” “Yvette does not haveher umbrella or she does not get wet,” and “It is raining or Yvette does not get wet” imply that “Yvette does not get wet.” 32.Show that the equivalence p∧¬p≡Fcan be derived using resolution together with the fact that a conditionalstatement with a false hypothesis is true. [ Hint: Letq= r=Fin resolution.] 33.Use resolution to show that the compound proposition (p∨q)∧(¬p∨q)∧(p∨¬q)∧(¬p∨¬q) is not satisfiable. ∗34.The Logic Problem, taken from WFF’N PROOF, The Game of Logic, has these two assumptions: 1. “Logic is difficult or not many students like logic.”2. “If mathematics is easy, then logic is not difficult.” By translating these assumptions into statements involving propositional variables and logical connectives, de-termine whether each of the following are valid conclusions of these assumptions: a)That mathematics is not easy, if many students like logic. b)That not many students like logic, if mathematics is not easy. c)That mathematics is not easy or logic is difficult. d)That logic is not difficult or mathematics is not easy. e)That if not many students like logic, then either math-ematics is not easy or logic is not difficult. ∗35.Determine whether this argument, taken from Kalish and Montague [KaMo64], is valid. If Superman were able and willing to prevent evil,he would do so. If Superman were unable to prevent evil, he would be impotent; if he were unwilling to prevent evil, he would be malevolent. Supermandoes not prevent evil. If Superman exists, he is neither impotent nor malevolent. Therefore, Superman does not exist. 1.7 Introduction to Proofs 1.7.1 Introduction In this section we introduce the notion of a proof and describe methods for constructing proofs. A proof is a valid argument that establishes the truth of a mathematical statement. A proof canuse the hypotheses of the theorem, if any, axioms assumed to be true, and previously proventheorems. Using these ingredients and rules of inference, the final step of the proof establishesthe truth of the statement being proved. In our discussion we move from formal proofs of theorems toward more informal proofs. The arguments we introduced in Section 1.6 to show that statements involving propositionsand quantified statements are true were formal proofs, where all steps were supplied, and therules for each step in the argument were given. However, formal proofs of useful theorems can

=== PDF Page 2 | Book Page 85 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 85 be extremely long and hard to follow. In practice, the proofs of theorems designed for human consumption are almost always informal proofs, where more than one rule of inference may be used in each step, where steps may be skipped, where the axioms being assumed and therules of inference used are not explicitly stated. Informal proofs can often explain to humanswhy theorems are true, while computers are perfectly happy producing formal proofs usingautomated reasoning systems. The methods of proof discussed in this chapter are important not only because they are used to prove mathematical theorems, but also for their many applications to computer science. Theseapplications include verifying that computer programs are correct, establishing that operatingsystems are secure, making inferences in artificial intelligence, showing that system specifica-tions are consistent, and so on. Consequently, understanding the techniques used in proofs isessential both in mathematics and in computer science. 1.7.2 Some Terminology Formally, a theorem is a statement that can be shown to be true. In mathematical writing, the term theorem is usually reserved for a statement that is considered at least somewhat important.Less important theorems sometimes are called propositions. (Theorems can also be referred to asfacts orresults.) A theorem may be the universal quantification of a conditional statement Linkswith one or more premises and a conclusion. However, it may be some other type of logicalstatement, as the examples later in this chapter will show. We demonstrate that a theorem is truewith a proof. A proof is a valid argument that establishes the truth of a theorem. The statements used in a proof can include axioms (orpostulates), which are statements we assume to be true (for example, the axioms for the real numbers, given in Appendix 1, and the axioms of planegeometry), the premises, if any, of the theorem, and previously proven theorems. Axioms maybe stated using primitive terms that do not require definition, but all other terms used in theoremsand their proofs must be defined. Rules of inference, together with definitions of terms, are usedto draw conclusions from other assertions, tying together the steps of a proof. In practice, thefinal step of a proof is usually just the conclusion of the theorem. However, for clarity, we willoften recap the statement of the theorem as the final step of a proof. A less important theorem that is helpful in the proof of other results is called a lemma (plural lemmas orlemmata ). Complicated proofs are usually easier to understand when they are proved using a series of lemmas, where each lemma is proved individually. A corollary is a theorem that can be established directly from a theorem that has been proved. A conjecture is a statement that is being proposed to be a true statement, usually on the basis of some partialevidence, a heuristic argument, or the intuition of an expert. When a proof of a conjecture isfound, the conjecture becomes a theorem. Many times conjectures are shown to be false, so theyare not theorems. 1.7.3 Understanding How Theorems Are Stated Before we introduce methods for proving theorems, we need to understand how many mathe- Extra Examples matical theorems are stated. Many theorems assert that a property holds for all elements in a domain, such as the integers or the real numbers. Although the precise statement of such theo-rems needs to include a universal quantifier, the standard convention in mathematics is to omitit. For example, the statement “Ifx>y, where xandyare positive real numbers, then x 2>y2” really means “For all positive real numbers xandy,i fx>y, then x2>y2.”

=== PDF Page 3 | Book Page 86 ===
86 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Furthermore, when theorems of this type are proved, the first step of the proof usually involves selecting a general element of the domain. Subsequent steps show that this element has theproperty in question. Finally, universal generalization implies that the theorem holds for allmembers of the domain. 1.7.4 Methods of Proving Theorems Proving mathematical theorems can be difficult. To construct proofs we need all available am-munition, including a powerful battery of different proof methods. These methods provide theoverall approach and strategy of proofs. Understanding these methods is a key component oflearning how to read and construct mathematical proofs. Once we have chosen a proof method, Assessment we use axioms, definitions of terms, previously proved results, and rules of inference to com-plete the proof. Note that in this book we will always assume the axioms for real numbers foundin Appendix 1. We will also assume the usual axioms whenever we prove a result about ge-ometry. When you construct your own proofs, be careful not to use anything but these axioms,definitions, and previously proved results as facts! To prove a theorem of the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)), our goal is to show that P(c)→Q(c)i s true, where cis an arbitrary element of the domain, and then apply universal generalization. In this proof, we need to show that a conditional statement is true. Because of this, we now focuson methods that show that conditional statements are true. Recall that p→qis true unless pis true but qis false. Note that to prove the statement p→q, we need only show that qis true if p is true. The following discussion will give the most common techniques for proving conditionalstatements. Later we will discuss methods for proving other types of statements. In this section,and in Section 1.8, we will develop a large arsenal of proof techniques that can be used to provea wide variety of theorems. When you read proofs, you will often find the words “obviously” or “clearly.” These words indicate that steps have been omitted that the author expects the reader to be able to fill in.Unfortunately, this assumption is often not warranted and readers are not at all sure how to fillin the gaps. We will assiduously try to avoid using these words and try not to omit too manysteps. However, if we included all steps in proofs, our proofs would often be excruciatingly long. 1.7.5 Direct Proofs Adirect proof of a conditional statement p→qis constructed when the first step is the assumption that pis true; subsequent steps are constructed using rules of inference, with the final step showing that qmust also be true. A direct proof shows that a conditional statement p→q is true by showing that if pis true, then qmust also be true, so that the combination ptrue and qfalse never occurs. In a direct proof, we assume that pis true and use axioms, definitions, and previously proven theorems, together with rules of inference, to show that qmust also be true. You will find that direct proofs of many results are quite straightforward. Starting with the hy-pothesis and leading to the conclusion, the way forward is essentially dictated by the premisesavailable at that step. However, direct proofs sometimes require particular insights and can bequite tricky. The first direct proofs we present here are quite straightforward; later in the textyou will see some that require some insight. We will provide examples of several different direct proofs. Before we give the first example, we need to define some terminology. Definition 1 The integer niseven if there exists an integer ksuch that n=2k, and nisoddif there exists an integer ksuch that n=2k+1. (Note that every integer is either even or odd, and no integer is both even and odd.) Two integers have the same parity when both are even or both are odd; they have opposite parity when one is even and the other is odd.

=== PDF Page 4 | Book Page 87 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 87 EXAMPLE 1 Give a direct proof of the theorem “If nis an odd integer, then n2is odd.” Solution: Note that this theorem states ∀nP((n) →Q(n)), where P(n)i s“ nis an odd integer” and Q(n)i s“ n2is odd.” As we have said, we will follow the usual convention in mathematical proofs by showing that P(n) implies Q(n), and not explicitly using universal instantiation. To begin a direct proof of this theorem, we assume that the hypothesis of this conditional statement is true, namely, we assume that nis odd. By the definition of an odd integer, it follows that n=2k+1, where kis some integer. We want to show that n2is also odd. We can square both sides of theExtra Examples equation n=2k+1 to obtain a new equation that expresses n2. When we do this, we find that n2=(2k+1)2=4k2+4k+1=2(2k2+2k)+1. By the definition of an odd integer, we can conclude that n2is an odd integer (it is one more than twice an integer). Consequently, we have proved that if nis an odd integer, then n2is an odd integer. ◂ EXAMPLE 2 Give a direct proof that if mandnare both perfect squares, then nmis also a perfect square. (An integer ais aperfect square if there is an integer bsuch that a=b2.) Solution: To produce a direct proof of this theorem, we assume that the hypothesis of this conditional statement is true, namely, we assume that mandnare both perfect squares. By the definition of a perfect square, it follows that there are integers sandtsuch that m=s2and n=t2. The goal of the proof is to show that mnmust also be a perfect square when mandnare; looking ahead we see how we can show this by substituting s2formandt2fornintomn. This tells us that mn=s2t2. Hence, mn=s2t2=(ss)(tt )=(st)(st)=(st)2, using commutativity and associativity of multiplication. By the definition of perfect square, it follows that mnis also a perfect square, because it is the square of st, which is an integer. We have proved that if mandn are both perfect squares, then mnis also a perfect square. ◂ 1.7.6 Proof by Contraposition Direct proofs lead from the premises of a theorem to the conclusion. They begin with the premises, continue with a sequence of deductions, and end with the conclusion. However, wewill see that attempts at direct proofs often reach dead ends. We need other methods of prov-ing theorems of the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)). Proofs of theorems of this type that are not direct proofs, that is, that do not start with the premises and end with the conclusion, are called indirect proofs. An extremely useful type of indirect proof is known as proof by contraposition . Proofs by contraposition make use of the fact that the conditional statement p→qis equivalent to its contrapositive, ¬q→¬p. This means that the conditional statement p→qcan be proved by showing that its contrapositive, ¬q→¬p, is true. In a proof by contraposition of p→q,w e take¬qas a premise, and using axioms, definitions, and previously proven theorems, together with rules of inference, we show that ¬pmust follow. We will illustrate proof by contraposition with two examples. These examples show that proof by contraposition can succeed when wecannot easily find a direct proof. EXAMPLE 3 Prove that if nis an integer and 3n +2 is odd, then nis odd. Solution: We first attempt a direct proof. To construct a direct proof, we first assume that 3 n+2 is an odd integer. From the definition of an odd integer, we know that 3 n+2=2k+1 for some integer k. Can we use this fact to show that nis odd? We see that 3n +1=2k, but there does not seem to be any direct way to conclude that nis odd. Because our attempt at a direct proofExtra Examples failed, we next try a proof by contraposition.

=== PDF Page 5 | Book Page 88 ===
88 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs The first step in a proof by contraposition is to assume that the conclusion of the conditional statement “If 3n +2 is odd, then nis odd” is false; namely, assume that nis even. Then, by the definition of an even integer, n=2kfor some integer k. Substituting 2k forn, we find that 3n + 2=3(2k)+2=6k+2=2(3k+1). This tells us that 3n +2 is even (because it is a multiple of 2), and therefore not odd. This is the negation of the premise of the theorem. Because the negation of the conclusion of the conditional statement implies that the hypothesis is false, theoriginal conditional statement is true. Our proof by contraposition succeeded; we have provedthe theorem “If 3n +2 is odd, then nis odd.” ◂ EXAMPLE 4 Prove that if n=ab, where aandbare positive integers, then a≤√ norb≤√ n. Solution: Because there is no obvious way of showing that a≤√ norb≤√ ndirectly from the equation n=ab, where aandbare positive integers, we attempt a proof by contraposition. The first step in a proof by contraposition is to assume that the conclusion of the conditional statement “If n=ab, where aandbare positive integers, then a≤√ norb≤√ n” is false. That is, we assume that the statement (a ≤√ n)∨(b≤√ n) is false. Using the meaning of disjunction together with De Morgan’s law, we see that this implies that both a≤√ nandb≤√ nare false. This implies that a>√ nandb>√ n. We can multiply these inequalities together (using the fact that if 0 <s<tand 0<u<v, then su<tv) to obtain ab>√ n⋅√ n=n. This shows that ab≠n, which contradicts the statement n=ab. Because the negation of the conclusion of the conditional statement implies that the hypothesis is false, the original conditional statement is true. Our proof by contraposition succeeded; we have proved that if n=ab, where aandbare positive integers, then a≤√ nor b≤√ n. ◂ VACUOUS AND TRIVIAL PROOFS We can quickly prove that a conditional statement p→qis true when we know that pis false, because p→qmust be true when pis false. Consequently, if we can show that pis false, then we have a proof, called a vacuous proof,o ft h e conditional statement p→q. Vacuous proofs are often used to establish special cases of theorems that state that a conditional statement is true for all positive integers [i.e., a theorem of the kind∀nP(n), where P(n) is a propositional function]. Proof techniques for theorems of this kind will be discussed in Section 5.1. EXAMPLE 5 Show that the proposition P(0) is true, where P(n)i s“ I fn >1, then n2>n” and the domain consists of all integers. Solution: Note that P(0) is “If 0 >1, then 02>0.” We can show P(0) using a vacuous proof. Indeed, the hypothesis 0 >1 is false. This tells us that P(0) is automatically true. ◂ Remark: The fact that the conclusion of this conditional statement, 02>0, is false is irrelevant to the truth value of the conditional statement, because a conditional statement with a false hypothesis is guaranteed to be true. EXAMPLE 6 Prove that if nis an integer with 10 ≤n≤15 which is a perfect square, then nis also a perfect cube. Solution: Note that there are no perfect squares nwith 10 ≤n≤15, because 32=9 and 42=16. Hence, the statement that nis an integer with 10 ≤n≤15 which is a perfect square is false for all integers n. Consequently, the statement to be proved is true for all integers n. ◂

=== PDF Page 6 | Book Page 89 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 89 We can also quickly prove a conditional statement p→qif we know that the conclusion qis true. By showing that qis true, it follows that p→qmust also be true. A proof of p→q that uses the fact that qis true is called a trivial proof. Trivial proofs are often important when special cases of theorems are proved (see the discussion of proof by cases in Section 1.8) and in mathematical induction, which is a proof technique discussed in Section 5.1. EXAMPLE 7 LetP(n)b e“ I fa andbare positive integers with a≥b, then an≥bn,” where the domain consists of all nonnegative integers. Show that P(0) is true. Solution: The proposition P(0) is “If a≥b, then a0≥b0.” Because a0=b0=1, the conclusion of the conditional statement “If a≥b, then a0≥b0” is true. Hence, this conditional statement, which is P(0), is true. This is an example of a trivial proof. Note that the hypothesis, which is the statement “a ≥b,” was not needed in this proof. ◂ A LITTLE PROOF STRATEGY We have described two important approaches for proving theorems of the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)): direct proof and proof by contraposition. We have also given examples that show how each is used. However, when you are presented with a theoremof the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)), which method should you use to attempt to prove it? We will provide a few rules of thumb here; in Section 1.8 we will discuss proof strategy at greater length. When you want to prove a statement of the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)), first evaluate whether a direct proof looks promising. Begin by expanding the definitions in the hypotheses. Start toreason using these hypotheses, together with axioms and available theorems. If a direct proofdoes not seem to go anywhere, for instance when there is no clear way to use hypotheses as inExamples 3 and 4 to reach the conclusion, try the same thing with a proof by contraposition. (Hypotheses such as xis irrational or x≠0 that are difficult to reason from are a clue that an indirect proof might be your best best.) Recall that in a proof by contraposition you assume that the conclusion of the conditional statement is false and use a direct proof to show this implies that the hypothesis must be false.Often, you will find that a proof by contraposition is easily constructed from the negation ofthe conclusion. We illustrate this strategy in Examples 7 and 8. In each example, note howstraightforward a proof by contraposition is, while there is no clear way to provide a directproof. Before we present our next example, we need a definition. Definition 2 The real number risrational if there exist integers pandqwith q≠0 such that r=p∕q.A real number that is not rational is called irrational. EXAMPLE 8 Prove that the sum of two rational numbers is rational. (Note that if we include the implicitquantifiers here, the theorem we want to prove is “For every real number rand every real number s,i fr andsare rational numbers, then r+sis rational.) Solution: We first attempt a direct proof. To begin, suppose that randsare rational numbers.Extra Examples From the definition of a rational number, it follows that there are integers pandq,w i t h q≠0, such that r=p∕q, and integers tandu,w i t hu ≠0, such that s=t∕u. Can we use this information to show that r+sis rational? That is, can we find integers vandwsuch that r+s=v∕w andw≠0? With the goal of finding these integers vandw, we add r=p∕qands=t∕u, using quas the common denominator. We find that r+s=p q+t u=pu+qt qu.

=== PDF Page 7 | Book Page 90 ===
90 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Because q≠0 and u≠0, it follows that qu≠0. Consequently, we have expressed r+sas the ratio of two integers, v=pu+qtandw=qu, where w≠0. This means that r+sis rational. We have proved that the sum of two rational numbers is rational; our attempt to find a direct proof succeeded. ◂ EXAMPLE 9 Prove that if nis an integer and n2is odd, then nis odd. Solution: We first attempt a direct proof. Suppose that nis an integer and n2is odd. From the definition of an odd integer, there exists an integer ksuch that n2=2k+1. Can we use this information to show that nis odd? There seems to be no obvious approach to show that nis odd because solving for nproduces the equation n=±√ 2k+1, which is not terribly useful. Because this attempt to use a direct proof did not bear fruit, we next attempt a proof by contraposition. We take as our hypothesis the statement that nis not odd. Because every integer is odd or even, this means that nis even. This implies that there exists an integer ksuch that n=2k. To prove the theorem, we need to show that this hypothesis implies the conclusion thatn2is not odd, that is, that n2is even. Can we use the equation n=2kto achieve this? By squaring both sides of this equation, we obtain n2=4k2=2(2k2), which implies that n2is also even because n2=2t, where t=2k2. We have proved that if nis an integer and n2is odd, then nis odd. Our attempt to find a proof by contraposition succeeded. ◂ 1.7.7 Proofs by Contradiction Suppose we want to prove that a statement pis true. Furthermore, suppose that we can find a contradiction qsuch that¬p→qis true. Because qis false, but ¬p→qis true, we can conclude that¬pis false, which means that pis true. How can we find a contradiction qthat might help us prove that pis true in this way? Because the statement r∧¬ris a contradiction whenever ris a proposition, we can prove thatpis true if we can show that ¬p→(r∧¬r) is true for some proposition r. Proofs of this type are called proofs by contradiction . Because a proof by contradiction does not prove a result directly, it is another type of indirect proof. We provide three examples of proof by contradiction.The first is an example of an application of the pigeonhole principle, a combinatorial techniquethat we will cover in depth in Section 6.2. EXAMPLE 10 Show that at least four of any 22 days must fall on the same day of the week. Solution: Letpbe the proposition “At least four of 22 chosen days fall on the same day of the week.” Suppose that ¬pis true. This means that at most three of the 22 days fall on the same day of the week. Because there are seven days of the week, this implies that at most 21 daysExtra Examples could have been chosen, as for each of the days of the week, at most three of the chosen days could fall on that day. This contradicts the premise that we have 22 days under consideration.That is, if ris the statement that 22 days are chosen, then we have shown that ¬p→(r∧¬r). Consequently, we know that pis true. We have proved that at least four of 22 chosen days fall on the same day of the week. ◂ EXAMPLE 11 Prove that√ 2 is irrational by giving a proof by contradiction. Solution: Letpbe the proposition “√ 2 is irrational.” To start a proof by contradiction, we suppose that ¬pis true. Note that ¬pis the statement “It is not the case that√ 2 is irrational,” which says that√ 2 is rational. We will show that assuming that ¬pis true leads to a contradiction.

=== PDF Page 8 | Book Page 91 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 91 If√ 2 is rational, there exist integers aandbwith√ 2=a∕b, where b≠0 and aandbhave no common factors (so that the fraction a∕bis in lowest terms). (Here, we are using the fact that every rational number can be written in lowest terms.) Because√ 2=a∕b, when both sides of this equation are squared, it follows that 2=a2 b2. Hence, 2b2=a2. By the definition of an even integer it follows that a2is even. We next use the fact that if a2is even, amust also be even, which follows by Exercise 18. Furthermore, because ais even, by the definition of an even integer, a=2cfor some integer c. Thus, 2b2=4c2. Dividing both sides of this equation by 2 gives b2=2c2. By the definition of even, this means that b2is even. Again using the fact that if the square of an integer is even, then the integer itself must be even, we conclude that bmust be even as well. We have now shown that the assumption of ¬pleads to the equation√ 2=a∕b, where aandbhave no common factors, but both aandbare even, that is, 2 divides both aandb. Note that the statement that√ 2=a∕b, where aandbhave no common factors, means, in particular, that 2 does not divide both aandb. Because our assumption of ¬pleads to the contradiction that 2 divides both aandband 2 does not divide both aandb,¬pmust be false. That is, the statement p,“√ 2 is irrational,” is true. We have proved that√ 2 is irrational. ◂ Proof by contradiction can be used to prove conditional statements. In such proofs, we first assume the negation of the conclusion. We then use the premises of the theorem and the negation of the conclusion to arrive at a contradiction. (The reason that such proofs are valid rests on thelogical equivalence of p→qand (p∧¬q)→F. To see that these statements are equivalent, simply note that each is false in exactly one case, namely, when pis true and qis false.) Note that we can rewrite a proof by contraposition of a conditional statement as a proof by contradiction. In a proof of p→qby contraposition, we assume that ¬qis true. We then show that ¬pmust also be true. To rewrite a proof by contraposition of p→qas a proof by contradiction, we suppose that both pand¬qare true. Then, we use the steps from the proof of ¬q→¬pto show that ¬pis true. This leads to the contradiction p∧¬p, completing the proof. Example 11 illustrates how a proof by contraposition of a conditional statement can be rewrittenas a proof by contradiction. EXAMPLE 12 Give a proof by contradiction of the theorem “If 3 n+2 is odd, then nis odd.” Solution: Letpbe “3n+2 is odd” and qbe “n is odd.” To construct a proof by contradiction, assume that both pand¬qare true. That is, assume that 3n +2 is odd and that nis not odd. Because nis not odd, we know that it is even. Because nis even, there is an integer ksuch thatn=2k. This implies that 3n +2=3(2k)+2=6k+2=2(3k+1). Because 3n +2i s2 t, where t=3k+1, 3n+2 is even. Note that the statement “3n +2 is even” is equivalent to the statement ¬p, because an integer is even if and only if it is not odd. Because both pand¬pare

=== PDF Page 9 | Book Page 92 ===
92 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs true, we have a contradiction. This completes the proof by contradiction, proving that if 3 n+2 is odd, then nis odd. ◂ Note that we can also prove by contradiction that p→qis true by assuming that pand¬q are true, and showing that qmust be also be true. This implies that ¬qandqare both true, a contradiction. This observation tells us that we can turn a direct proof into a proof by contradiction. PROOFS OF EQUIVALENCE To prove a theorem that is a biconditional statement, that is, a statement of the form p↔q, we show that p→qandq→pare both true. The validity of this approach is based on the tautology (p↔q)↔(p→q)∧(q→p). EXAMPLE 13 Prove the theorem “If nis an integer, then nis odd if and only if n2is odd.” Solution: This theorem has the form “p if and only if q,” where pis “n is odd” and qis “n2 is odd.” (As usual, we do not explicitly deal with the universal quantification.) To prove thistheorem, we need to show that p→qandq→pare true. We have already shown (in Example 1) that p→qis true and (in Example 8) that q→pisExtra Examples true. Because we have shown that both p→qandq→pare true, we have shown that the theorem is true. ◂ Sometimes a theorem states that several propositions are equivalent. Such a theorem states that propositions p1,p2,p3,…,pnare equivalent. This can be written as p1↔p2↔⋯↔pn, which states that all npropositions have the same truth values, and consequently, that for all i andjwith 1 ≤i≤nand 1≤j≤n,piandpjare equivalent. One way to prove these are mutually equivalent is to use the tautology p1↔p2↔⋯↔pn↔(p1→p2)∧(p2→p3)∧⋯∧(pn→p1). This shows that if the nconditional statements p1→p2,p2→p3,…,pn→p1can be shown to be true, then the propositions p1,p2,…,pnare all equivalent. This is much more efficient than proving that pi→pjfor all i≠jwith 1 ≤i≤nand 1≤ j≤n. (Note that there are n2−nsuch conditional statements.) When we prove that a group of statements are equivalent, we can establish any chain of conditional statements we choose as long as it is possible to work through the chain to go from any one of these statements to any other statement. For example, we can show that p1,p2, and p3are equivalent by showing that p1→p3,p3→p2, and p2→p1. EXAMPLE 14 Show that these statements about the integer nare equivalent: p1:nis even. p2:n−1 is odd. p3:n2is even. Solution: We will show that these three statements are equivalent by showing that the conditional statements p1→p2,p2→p3, and p3→p1are true.

=== PDF Page 10 | Book Page 93 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 93 We use a direct proof to show that p1→p2. Suppose that nis even. Then n=2kfor some integer k. Consequently, n−1=2k−1=2(k−1)+1. This means that n−1 is odd because it is of the form 2m +1, where mis the integer k−1. We also use a direct proof to show that p2→p3. Now suppose n−1 is odd. Then n−1=2k+1 for some integer k. Hence, n=2k+2s ot h a tn2=(2k+2)2=4k2+8k+4= 2(2k2+4k+2). This means that n2is twice the integer 2k2+4k+2, and hence is even. To prove p3→p1, we use a proof by contraposition. That is, we prove that if nis not even, then n2is not even. This is the same as proving that if nis odd, then n2is odd, which we have already done in Example 1. This completes the proof. ◂ COUNTEREXAMPLES In Section 1.4 we stated that to show that a statement of the form ∀xP(x ) is false, we need only find a counterexample, that is, an example xfor which P(x)i s false. When presented with a statement of the form ∀xP(x ), which we believe to be false or which has resisted all proof attempts, we look for a counterexample. We illustrate the use of counterexamples in Example 15. EXAMPLE 15 Show that the statement “Every positive integer is the sum of the squares of two integers” is false. Solution: To show that this statement is false, we look for a counterexample, which is a particular integer that is not the sum of the squares of two integers. It does not take long to findExtra Examples a counterexample, because 3 cannot be written as the sum of the squares of two integers. To show this is the case, note that the only perfect squares not exceeding 3 are 02=0 and 12=1. Furthermore, there is no way to get 3 as the sum of two terms each of which is 0 or 1. Conse-quently, we have shown that “Every positive integer is the sum of the squares of two integers”is false. ◂ 1.7.8 Mistakes in Proofs There are many common errors made in constructing mathematical proofs. We will briefly de-scribe some of these here. Among the most common errors are mistakes in arithmetic and basicalgebra. Even professional mathematicians make such errors, especially when working withcomplicated formulae. Whenever you use such computations you should check them as care-fully as possible. (You should also review any troublesome aspects of basic algebra, especiallybefore you study Section 5.1.) Each step of a mathematical proof needs to be correct and the conclusion needs to follow Linkslogically from the steps that precede it. Many mistakes result from the introduction of steps thatdo not logically follow from those that precede it. This is illustrated in Examples 16–18. EXAMPLE 16 What is wrong with this famous supposed “proof” that 1 =2? “Proof”: We use these steps, where aandbare two equal positive integers. Step Reason 1.a=b Given 2.a2=ab Multiply both sides of (1) by a 3.a2−b2=ab−b2Subtract b2from both sides of (2) 4. (a−b)(a+b)=b(a−b) Factor both sides of (3) 5.a+b=b Divide both sides of (4) by a−b 6. 2b=b Replace abybin (5) because a=b and simplify 7. 2=1 Divide both sides of (6) by b

=== PDF Page 11 | Book Page 94 ===
94 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Solution: Every step is valid except for step 5, where we divided both sides by a−b. The error is that a−bequals zero; division of both sides of an equation by the same quantity is valid as long as this quantity is not zero. ◂ EXAMPLE 17 What is wrong with this “proof”? “Theorem”: If n2is positive, then nis positive. “Proof ”: Suppose that n2is positive. Because the conditional statement “If nis positive, then n2is positive” is true, we can conclude that nis positive. Solution: LetP(n)b e“ nis positive” and Q(n)b e“ n2is positive.” Then our hypothesis is Q(n). The statement “If nis positive, then n2is positive” is the statement ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)). From the hypothesis Q(n) and the statement ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)) we cannot conclude P(n), because we are not using a valid rule of inference. Instead, this is an example of the fallacy of affirming the conclusion. A counterexample is supplied by n=−1 for which n2=1 is positive, but nis negative. ◂ EXAMPLE 18 What is wrong with this “proof”? “Theorem”: If nis not positive, then n2is not positive. (This is the contrapositive of the “theorem” in Example 17.) “Proof ”: Suppose that nis not positive. Because the conditional statement “If nis positive, then n2is positive” is true, we can conclude that n2is not positive. Solution: LetP(n) and Q(n) be as in the solution of Example 17. Then our hypothesis is ¬P(n) and the statement “If nis positive, then n2is positive” is the statement ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)). From the hypothesis ¬P(n) and the statement ∀n(P(n) →Q(n)) we cannot conclude ¬Q(n), because we are not using a valid rule of inference. Instead, this is an example of the fallacy of denyingthe hypothesis. A counterexample is supplied by n=−1, as in Example 17. ◂ Finally, we briefly discuss a particularly nasty type of error. Many incorrect arguments are based on a fallacy called begging the question. This fallacy occurs when one or more steps of a proof are based on the truth of the statement being proved. In other words, this fallacy ariseswhen a statement is proved using itself, or a statement equivalent to it. That is why this fallacyis also called circular reasoning. EXAMPLE 19 Is the following argument correct? It supposedly shows that nis an even integer whenever n2is an even integer. Suppose that n2is even. Then n2=2kfor some integer k.L e tn=2lfor some integer l. This shows that nis even. Solution: This argument is incorrect. The statement “let n=2lfor some integer l” occurs in the proof. No argument has been given to show that ncan be written as 2l for some integer l. This is circular reasoning because this statement is equivalent to the statement being proved, namely,“nis even.” The result itself is correct; only the method of proof is wrong. ◂

=== PDF Page 12 | Book Page 95 ===
1.7 Introduction to Proofs 95 Making mistakes in proofs is part of the learning process. When you make a mistake that someone else finds, you should carefully analyze where you went wrong and make sure that you do not make the same mistake again. Even professional mathematicians make mistakes inproofs. More than a few incorrect proofs of important results have fooled people for many yearsbefore subtle errors in them were found. 1.7.9 Just a Beginning We have now developed a basic arsenal of proof methods. In the next section we will introduceother important proof methods. We will also introduce several important proof techniques inChapter 5, including mathematical induction, which can be used to prove results that hold forall positive integers. In Chapter 6 we will introduce the notion of combinatorial proofs. In this section we introduced several methods for proving theorems of the form ∀x(P(x)→ Q(x)), including direct proofs and proofs by contraposition. There are many theorems of this type whose proofs are easy to construct by directly working through the hypotheses and definitionsof the terms of the theorem. However, it is often difficult to prove a theorem without resortingto a clever use of a proof by contraposition or a proof by contradiction, or some other prooftechnique. In Section 1.8 we will address proof strategy. We will describe various approachesthat can be used to find proofs when straightforward approaches do not work. Constructingproofs is an art that can be learned only through experience, including writing proofs, havingyour proofs critiqued, and reading and analyzing other proofs. Exercises 1.Use a direct proof to show that the sum of two odd integers is even. 2.Use a direct proof to show that the sum of two even integers is even. 3.Show that the square of an even number is an even number using a direct proof. 4.Show that the additive inverse, or negative, of an even number is an even number using a direct proof. 5.Prove that if m+nandn+pare even integers, where m, n, andpare integers, then m+pis even. What kind of proof did you use? 6.Use a direct proof to show that the product of two odd numbers is odd. 7.Use a direct proof to show that every odd integer is thedifference of two squares. [Hint: Find the difference of the squares of k+1a n d kwhere kis a positive integer.] 8.Prove that if nis a perfect square, then n+2i sn o tap e r - fect square. 9.Use a proof by contradiction to prove that the sum of anirrational number and a rational number is irrational. 10.Use a direct proof to show that the product of two rationalnumbers is rational. 11.Prove or disprove that the product of two irrational num-bers is irrational. 12.Prove or disprove that the product of a nonzero rationalnumber and an irrational number is irrational. 13.Prove that if xis irrational, then 1 ∕xis irrational.14.Prove that if xis rational and x≠0, then 1∕x is rational. 15.Prove that if xis an irrational number and x>0, then√ x is also irrational. 16.Prove that if x,y,a n dz are integers and x+y+zis odd, then at least one of x,y,a n d zis odd. 17.Use a proof by contraposition to show that if x+y≥2, where xandyare real numbers, then x≥1o ry≥1. 18.Prove that if mandnare integers and mnis even, then m is even or nis even. 19.Show that if nis an integer and n3+5 is odd, then nis even using a)a proof by contraposition. b)a proof by contradiction. 20.Prove that if nis an integer and 3 n+2i se v e n ,t h e nn is even using a)a proof by contraposition. b)a proof by contradiction. 21.Prove the proposition P(0), where P(n) is the proposition “Ifnis a positive integer greater than 1, then n2>n.” What kind of proof did you use? 22.Prove the proposition P(1), where P(n) is the proposition “If nis a positive integer, then n2≥n.” What kind of proof did you use? 23.LetP(n) be the proposition “If aandbare positive real numbers, then ( a+b)n≥an+bn.” Prove that P(1) is true. What kind of proof did you use? 24.Show that if you pick three socks from a drawer containing just blue socks and black socks, you must get either a pair of blue socks or a pair of black socks.
