=== PDF Page 1 | Book Page 96 ===
96 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 25.Show that at least ten of any 64 days chosen must fall on the same day of the week. 26.Show that at least three of any 25 days chosen must fallin the same month of the year. 27.Use a proof by contradiction to show that there is no ra-tional number rfor which r 3+r+1=0. [Hint: Assume thatr=a∕bis a root, where aandbare integers and a∕b is in lowest terms. Obtain an equation involving integersby multiplying by b 3. Then look at whether aandbare each odd or even.] 28.Prove that if nis a positive integer, then nis even if and only if 7n +4i se v e n . 29.Prove that if nis a positive integer, then nis odd if and only if 5n +6 is odd. 30.Prove that m2=n2if and only if m=norm=−n. 31.Prove or disprove that if mandnare integers such that mn=1, then either m=1a n d n=1, or else m=−1a n d n=−1. 32.Show that these three statements are equivalent, where a andbare real numbers: ( i)ais less than b,(ii) the average ofaandbis greater than a,a n d( iii) the average of aand bis less than b. 33.Show that these statements about the integer xare equivalent: (i)3 x+2i se v e n ,( ii)x+5 is odd, ( iii)x2 is even. 34.Show that these statements about the real number xare equivalent: ( i)xis rational, (ii) x∕2 is rational, (iii)3 x−1 is rational. 35.Show that these statements about the real number xare equivalent: ( i)xis irrational, (ii)3 x+2 is irrational, (iii)x∕2 is irrational. 36.Is this reasoning for finding the solutions of the equation√ 2x2−1=xcorrect? (1)√ 2x2−1=xis given; (2) 2x2−1=x2, obtained by squaring both sides of (1);(3)x2−1=0, obtained by subtracting x2from both sides of (2); (4) (x −1)(x+1)=0, obtained by factoring the left-hand side of x2−1; (5) x=1o r x=−1, which follows because ab=0 implies that a=0o r b=0. 37.Are these steps for finding the solutions of√ x+3= 3−xcorrect? (1)√ x+3=3−xis given; (2) x+3= x2−6x+9, obtained by squaring both sides of (1); (3) 0=x2−7x+6, obtained by subtracting x+3f r o mb o t h sides of (2); (4) 0 =(x−1)(x−6), obtained by factoring the right-hand side of (3); (5) x=1o r x=6, which follows from (4) because ab=0 implies that a=0o rb=0. 38.Show that the propositions p1,p2,p3,a n d p4can be shown to be equivalent by showing that p1↔p4,p2↔p3,a n d p1↔p3. 39.Show that the propositions p1,p2,p3,p4,a n dp5can be shown to be equivalent by proving that the conditional statements p1→p4,p3→p1,p4→p2,p2→p5, andp5→p3are true. 40.Find a counterexample to the statement that every posi-tive integer can be written as the sum of the squares of three integers. 41.Prove that at least one of the real numbers a 1,a2,…,an is greater than or equal to the average of these numbers.What kind of proof did you use? 42.Use Exercise 41 to show that if the first 10 positive inte-gers are placed around a circle, in any order, there exist three integers in consecutive locations around the circle that have a sum greater than or equal to 17. 43.Prove that if nis an integer, these four statements are equivalent: ( i)nis even, (ii) n+1 is odd, ( iii)3 n+1i s odd, (iv)3 nis even. 44.Prove that these four statements about the integer nare equivalent: (i) n 2is odd, (ii)1 −nis even, (iii) n3is odd, (iv)n2+1i se v e n . 1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 1.8.1 Introduction In Section 1.7 we introduced many methods of proof and illustrated how each method canAssessmentbe used. In this section we continue this effort. We will introduce several other commonly used proof methods, including the method of proving a theorem by considering different casesseparately. We will also discuss proofs where we prove the existence of objects with desiredproperties. In Section 1.7 we briefly discussed the strategy behind constructing proofs. This strategy includes selecting a proof method and then successfully constructing an argument step by step,based on this method. In this section, after we have developed a versatile arsenal of proof meth-ods, we will study some aspects of the art and science of proofs. We will provide advice on howto find a proof of a theorem. We will describe some tricks of the trade, including how proofscan be found by working backward and by adapting existing proofs.

=== PDF Page 2 | Book Page 97 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 97 When mathematicians work, they formulate conjectures and attempt to prove or disprove them. We will briefly describe this process here by proving results about tiling checkerboards with dominoes and other types of pieces. Looking at tilings of this kind, we will be able toquickly formulate conjectures and prove theorems without first developing a theory. We will conclude the section by discussing the role of open questions. In particular, we will discuss some interesting problems either that have been solved after remaining open forhundreds of years or that still remain open. 1.8.2 Exhaustive Proof and Proof by Cases Sometimes we cannot prove a theorem using a single argument that holds for all possible cases.We now introduce a method that can be used to prove a theorem by considering different casesseparately. This method is based on a rule of inference that we will now introduce. To prove aconditional statement of the form (p 1∨p2∨⋯∨pn)→q the tautology [(p1∨p2∨⋯∨pn)→q]↔[(p1→q)∧(p2→q)∧⋯∧(pn→q)] can be used as a rule of inference. This shows that the original conditional statement with ahypothesis made up of a disjunction of the propositions p 1,p2,…,pncan be proved by proving each of the nconditional statements pi→q,i=1,2,…,n, individually. Such an argument is called a proof by cases. Sometimes to prove that a conditional statement p→qis true, it is convenient to use a disjunction p1∨p2∨⋯∨pninstead of pas the hypothesis of the conditional statement, where pandp1∨p2∨⋯∨pnare equivalent. EXHAUSTIVE PROOF Some theorems can be proved by examining a relatively small number of examples. Such proofs are called exhaustive proofs,o r proofs by exhaustion because these proofs proceed by exhausting all possibilities. An exhaustive proof is a special type ofproof by cases where each case involves checking a single example. We now provide someillustrations of exhaustive proofs. EXAMPLE 1 Prove that (n +1)3≥3nifnis a positive integer with n≤4. Solution: We use a proof by exhaustion. We only need verify the inequality (n +1)3≥3nwhen n=1,2,3,and 4. For n=1, we have (n +1)3=23=8 and 3n=31=3; for n=2, we have (n+1)3=33=27 and 3n=32=9; for n=3, we have (n +1)3=43=64 and 3n=33=27; and for n=4, we have (n +1)3=53=125 and 3n=34=81. In each of these four cases, weExtra Examples see that (n +1)3≥3n. We have used the method of exhaustion to prove that (n +1)3≥3nifn is a positive integer with n≤4. ◂ EXAMPLE 2 Prove that the only consecutive positive integers not exceeding 100 that are perfect powers are 8 and 9. (An integer nis aperfect power if it equals ma, where mis an integer and ais an integer greater than 1.) Solution: We use a proof by exhaustion. In particular, we can prove this fact by examining positive integers nnot exceeding 100, first checking whether nis a perfect power, and if it is, checking whether n+1 is also a perfect power. A quicker way to do this is simply to look at all perfect powers not exceeding 100 and checking whether the next largest integer is also a perfect power. The squares of positive integers not exceeding 100 are 1 ,4,9,16,25,36,49,64,81, and

=== PDF Page 3 | Book Page 98 ===
98 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs 100. The cubes of positive integers not exceeding 100 are 1, 8, 27, and 64. The fourth powers of positive integers not exceeding 100 are 1, 16, and 81. The fifth powers of positive integersnot exceeding 100 are 1 and 32. The sixth powers of positive integers not exceeding 100 are 1and 64. There are no powers of positive integers higher than the sixth power not exceeding 100,other than 1. Looking at this list of perfect powers not exceeding 100, we see that n=8i st h e only perfect power nfor which n+1 is also a perfect power. That is, 2 3=8 and 32=9a r et h e only two consecutive perfect powers not exceeding 100. ◂ Proofs by exhaustion can tire out people and computers when the number of caseschallenges the availableprocessing power!People can carry out exhaustive proofs when it is necessary to check only a relatively small number of instances of a statement. Computers do not complain when they are asked to check a much larger number of instances of a statement, but they still have limitations. Note that noteven a computer can check all instances when it is impossible to list all instances to check. PROOF BY CASES A proof by cases must cover all possible cases that arise in a theorem. We illustrate proof by cases with a couple of examples. In each example, you should check thatall possible cases are covered. EXAMPLE 3 Prove that if nis an integer, then n2≥n. Solution: We can prove that n2≥nfor every integer by considering three cases, when n=0, when n≥1, and when n≤−1. We split the proof into three cases because it is straightforward to prove the result by considering zero, positive integers, and negative integers separately. Case (i): When n=0, because 02=0, we see that 02≥0. It follows that n2≥nis true in this case. Case (ii): When n≥1, when we multiply both sides of the inequality n≥1 by the positiveExtra Examples integer n, we obtain n⋅n≥n⋅1. This implies that n2≥nforn≥1. Case (iii): In this case n≤−1. However, n2≥0. It follows that n2≥n. Because the inequality n2≥nholds in all three cases, we can conclude that if nis an integer, then n2≥n. ◂ EXAMPLE 4 Use a proof by cases to show that |xy|=|x||y|, where xandyare real numbers. (Recall that |a|, the absolute value of a, equals awhen a≥0 and equals −awhen a≤0.) Solution: In our proof of this theorem, we remove absolute values using the fact that |a|=a when a≥0 and|a|=−awhen a≤0. Because both |x|and|y|occur in our formula, we will need four cases: (i) x andyboth nonnegative, (ii) x nonnegative and ynegative, (iii) x negative andynonnegative, and (iv) x negative and ynegative. We denote by p1,p2,p3, and p4,t h e proposition stating the assumption for each of these four cases, respectively. (Note that we can remove the absolute value signs by making the appropriate choice of signs within each case.) Case (i): We see that p1→qbecause xy≥0 when x≥0 and y≥0, so that |xy|=xy= |x||y|. Case (ii): To see that p2→q, note that if x≥0 and y<0, then xy≤0, so that |xy|=−xy= x(−y)=|x||y|. (Here, because y<0, we have |y|=−y.) Case (iii): To see that p3→q, we follow the same reasoning as the previous case with the roles of xandyreversed. Case (iv): To see that p4→q, note that when x<0 and y<0, it follows that xy>0. Hence, |xy|=xy=(−x)(−y)=|x||y|.

=== PDF Page 4 | Book Page 99 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 99 Because |xy|=|x||y|holds in each of the four cases and these cases exhaust all possibilities, we can conclude that |xy|=|x||y|, whenever xandyare real numbers. ◂ LEVERAGING PROOF BY CASES The examples we have presented illustrating proof by cases provide some insight into when to use this method of proof. In particular, when it is not possible to consider all cases of a proof at the same time, a proof by cases should be considered.When should you use such a proof? Generally, look for a proof by cases when there is no obviousway to begin a proof, but when extra information in each case helps move the proof forward.Example 5 illustrates how the method of proof by cases can be used effectively. EXAMPLE 5 Formulate a conjecture about the final decimal digit of the square of an integer and prove yourresult. Solution: The smallest perfect squares are 1 ,4,9,16,25,36,49,64,81,100, 121, 144, 169, 196, 225, and so on. We notice that the digits that occur as the final digit of a square are 0,1,4,5,6,and 9, with 2, 3,7,and 8 never appearing as the final digit of a square. We conjecture this theorem: The final decimal digit of a perfect square is 0 ,1,4,5,6, or 9. How can we prove this theorem? We first note that we can express an integer nas 10a+b, where aandbare positive integers and bis 0, 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8, or 9. Here ais the integer obtained by subtracting the final decimal digit of nfrom nand dividing by 10. Next, note that (10a +b) 2=100a2+20ab+b2= 10(10a2+2b)+b2, so that the final decimal digit of n2is the same as the final decimal digit ofb2. Furthermore, note that the final decimal digit of b2is the same as the final decimal digit of (10−b)2=100−20b+b2. Consequently, we can reduce our proof to the consideration of six cases. Case (i): The final digit of nis 1 or 9. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 12=1o r92=81, namely, 1. Case (ii): The final digit of nis 2 or 8. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 22=4o r82=64, namely, 4. Case (iii): The final digit of nis 3 or 7. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 32=9o r72=49, namely, 9. Case (iv): The final digit of nis 4 or 6. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 42=16 or 62=36, namely, 6. Case (v): The final decimal digit of nis 5. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 52=25, namely, 5. Case (vi): The final decimal digit of nis 0. Then the final decimal digit of n2is the final decimal digit of 02=0, namely, 0. Because we have considered all six cases, we can conclude that the final decimal digit of n2, where nis an integer is either 0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, or 9. ◂ Sometimes we can eliminate all but a few examples in a proof by cases, as Example 6 illustrates. EXAMPLE 6 Show that there are no solutions in integers xandyofx2+3y2=8. Solution: We can quickly reduce a proof to checking just a few simple cases because x2>8 when|x|≥3 and 3y2>8 when |y|≥2. This leaves the cases when xequals−2,−1,0,1,or 2 andyequals−1,0, or 1. We can finish using an exhaustive proof. To dispense with the remaining cases, we note that possible values for x2are 0 ,1, and 4, and possible values for 3y2are 0 and 3, and the largest sum of possible values for x2and 3y2is 7. Consequently, it is impossible for x2+3y2=8 to hold when xandyare integers. ◂

=== PDF Page 5 | Book Page 100 ===
100 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs WITHOUT LOSS OF GENERALITY In the proof in Example 4, we dismissed case ( iii), where x<0 and y≥0, because it is the same as case (ii), where x≥0 and y<0, with the roles ofxandyreversed. To shorten the proof, we could have proved cases ( ii) and (iii) together by assuming, without loss of generality, that x≥0 and y<0. Implicit in this statement is that we can complete the case with x<0 and y≥0 using the same argument as we used for the case with x≥0 and y<0, but with the obvious changes. In general, when the phrase “without loss of generality” is used in a proof (often abbreviated as WLOG), we assert that by proving one case of a theorem, no additional argument is required to prove other specified cases. That is, other cases follow by making straightforwardchanges to the argument, or by filling in some straightforward initial step. Proofs by cases can In a proof by cases be sure not to omit anycases and check that youhave proved all casescorrectly!often be made much more efficient when the notion of without loss of generality is employed. Incorrect use of this principle, however, can lead to unfortunate errors. Sometimes assumptionsare made that lead to a loss in generality. Such assumptions can be made that do not take intoaccount that one case may be substantially different from others. This can lead to an incomplete,and possibly unsalvageable, proof. In fact, many incorrect proofs of famous theorems turnedout to rely on arguments that used the idea of “without loss of generality” to establish casesthat could not be quickly proved from simpler cases. We now illustrate a proof where without loss of generality is used effectively together with other proof techniques. EXAMPLE 7 Show that if xandyare integers and both xyandx+yare even, then both xandyare even. Solution: We will use proof by contraposition, the notion of without loss of generality, and proof by cases. First, suppose that xandyare not both even. That is, assume that xis odd or that yis odd (or both). Without loss of generality, we assume that xis odd, so that x=2m+1 for some integer k. To complete the proof, we need to show that xyis odd or x+yis odd. Consider two cases: (i) yis even, and (ii) yis odd. In (i), y=2nfor some integer n, so that x+y= (2m+1)+2n=2(m+n)+1 is odd. In (ii), y=2n+1 for some integer n, so that xy=(2m+ 1)(2n+1)=4mn+2m+2n+1=2(2mn+m+n)+1 is odd. This completes the proof by contraposition. (Note that our use of without loss of generality within the proof is justifiedbecause the proof when yis odd can be obtained by simply interchanging the roles of xandyin the proof we have given.) ◂ COMMON ERRORS WITH EXHAUSTIVE PROOF AND PROOF BY CASES A common error of reasoning is to draw incorrect conclusions from examples. No matter how many separateexamples are considered, a theorem is not proved by considering examples unless every possiblecase is covered. The problem of proving a theorem is analogous to showing that a computerprogram always produces the output desired. No matter how many input values are tested, unlessall input values are tested, we cannot conclude that the program always produces the correctoutput. EXAMPLE 8 Is it true that every positive integer is the sum of 18 fourth powers of integers? Solution: To determine whether a positive integer ncan be written as the sum of 18 fourth powers of integers, we might begin by examining whether nis the sum of 18 fourth powers of integers for the smallest positive integers. Because the fourth powers of integers are 0, 1, 16, 81,…,if we can select 18 terms from these numbers that add up to n, then nis the sum of 18 fourth powers. We can show that all positive integers up to 78 can be written as the sum of18 fourth powers. (The details are left to the reader.) However, if we decided this was enoughchecking, we would come to the wrong conclusion. It is not true that every positive integer is

=== PDF Page 6 | Book Page 101 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 101 the sum of 18 fourth powers because 79 is not the sum of 18 fourth powers (as the reader can verify). ◂ Another common error involves making unwarranted assumptions that lead to incorrect proofs by cases where not all cases are considered. This is illustrated in Example 9. EXAMPLE 9 What is wrong with this “proof”? “Theorem”: If xis a real number, then x2is a positive real number. “Proof ”: Letp1be “x is positive,” let p2be “x is negative,” and let qbe “x2is positive.” To show that p1→qis true, note that when xis positive, x2is positive because it is the product of two positive numbers, xandx. To show that p2→q, note that when xis negative, x2is positive because it is the product of two negative numbers, xandx. This completes the proof. Solution: The problem with this “proof” is that we missed the case of x=0. When x=0, x2=0 is not positive, so the supposed theorem is false. If pis “x is a real number,” then we can prove results where pis the hypothesis with three cases, p1,p2, and p3, where p1is “x is positive,” p2is “x is negative,” and p3is “x=0” because of the equivalence p↔p1∨p2∨p3. ◂ 1.8.3 Existence Proofs Many theorems are assertions that objects of a particular type exist. A theorem of this type isa proposition of the form ∃xP(x ), where Pis a predicate. A proof of a proposition of the form ∃xP(x ) is called an existence proof. There are several ways to prove a theorem of this type. Sometimes an existence proof of ∃xP(x ) can be given by finding an element a, called a witness, such that P(a) is true. This type of existence proof is called constructive. It is also possible to give an existence proof that is nonconstructive; that is, we do not find an element asuch thatP(a) is true, but rather prove that ∃xP(x ) is true in some other way. One common method of giving a nonconstructive existence proof is to use proof by contradiction and show that thenegation of the existential quantification implies a contradiction. The concept of a constructiveexistence proof is illustrated by Example 10 and the concept of a nonconstructive existenceproof is illustrated by Example 11. EXAMPLE 10 A Constructive Existence Proof Show that there is a positive integer that can be written as the sum of cubes of positive integers in two different ways. Solution: After considerable computation (such as a computer search) we find thatExtra Examples 1729=103+93=123+13. Because we have displayed a positive integer that can be written as the sum of cubes in two different ways, we are done. There is an interesting story pertaining to this example. The English mathematician G. H. Hardy, when visiting the ailing Indian prodigy Ramanujan in the hospital, remarked that 1729,the number of the cab he took, was rather dull. Ramanujan replied “No, it is a very interestingnumber; it is the smallest number expressible as the sum of cubes in two different ways.” ◂ EXAMPLE 11 A Nonconstructive Existence Proof Show that there exist irrational numbers xandysuch thatxyis rational.

=== PDF Page 7 | Book Page 102 ===
102 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Solution: By Example 11 in Section 1.7 we know that√ 2 is irrational. Consider the number √ 2√ 2 . If it is rational, we have two irrational numbers xandywith xyrational, namely, x=√ 2 andy=√ 2. On the other hand if√ 2√ 2 is irrational, then we can let x=√ 2√ 2 andy=√ 2s o thatxy=(√ 2√ 2 )√ 2=√ 2(√ 2⋅√ 2) =√ 22 =2. This proof is an example of a nonconstructive existence proof because we have not found irrational numbers xandysuch that xyis rational. Rather, we have shown that either the pair x=√ 2,y=√ 2 or the pair x=√ 2√ 2 ,y=√ 2 have the desired property, but we do not know which of these two pairs works! ◂ Remark: Exercise 11 in Section 4.3 provides a constructive existence proof that there are irrational numbers xandysuch that xyis rational. Nonconstructive existence proofs often are quite subtle, as Example 12 illustrates. EXAMPLE 12 Chomp is a game played by two players. In this game, cookies are laid out on a rectangular grid. The cookie in the top left position is poisoned, as shown in Figure 1(a). The two players take turns making moves; at each move, a player is required to eat a remaining cookie, together with all cookies to the right and/or below it (see Figure 1(b), for example). The loser is the playerLinkswho has no choice but to eat the poisoned cookie. We ask whether one of the two players has a winning strategy. That is, can one of the players always make moves that are guaranteed to lead to a win? c/circlecopyrtAMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY/Science SourceGODFREY HAROLD HARDY (1877–1947) Hardy, born in Cranleigh, Surrey, England, was the older ofLinks two children of Isaac Hardy and Sophia Hall Hardy. His father was the geography and drawing master at the Cranleigh School and also gave singing lessons and played soccer. His mother gave piano lessons and helped run a boardinghouse for young students. Hardy’s parents were devoted to their children’s education. Hardy demonstrated his numerical ability at the early age of two when he began writing down numbers into the millions. He had a private mathematics tutor rather than attending regular classes at the Cranleigh School. He moved to Winchester College, a private high school, when he was 13 and was awarded a scholarship. He excelled in his studies and demonstrated a strong interest in mathematics. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1896 on a scholarship and won several prizes during his time there, graduating in 1899. Hardy held the position of lecturer in mathematics at Trinity College at Cambridge University from 1906 to 1919, when he was appointed to the Sullivan chair of geometry at Oxford. He had become unhappy with Cambridge over the dismissal of the noted philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell from Trinity for antiwar activities and did not like a heavy load of administrative duties. In 1931 he returned to Cambridge as the Sadleirian professor of pure mathematics, where he remained until his retirement in 1942. He was a pure mathematician and held an elitist view of mathematics, hoping that his research could never be applied. Ironically, he is perhaps best known as one of the developers of the Hardy–Weinberg law, which predicts patterns of inheritance. His work in this area appeared as a letter to the journal Science in which he used simple algebraic ideas to demonstrate errors in an article on genetics. Hardy worked primarily in number theory and function theory, exploring such topics as the Riemann zeta function, Fourier series, and the distribution of primes. He made many important contributions to many important problems, such as Waring’s problem about representing positive integers as sums of kth powers and the problem of representing odd integers as sums of three primes. Hardy is also remembered for his collaborations with John E. Littlewood, a colleague at Cambridge, with whom he wrote more than 100 papers, and the celebrated Indian mathematical prodigy Srinivasa Ramanujan. His collaboration with Littlewood led to the joke that there were only three important English mathematicians at that time, Hardy, Littlewood, and Hardy–Littlewood. However, some people believed that Hardy had invented a fictitious person, Littlewood, because Littlewood was seldom seen away from Cambridge. Hardy had the wisdom of recognizing Ramanujan’s genius from unconventional but extremely creative writings Ramanujan sent him, while other mathematicians failed to see the genius. Hardy brought Ramanujan to Cambridge and collaborated on important joint papers, establishing new results on the number of partitions of an integer. Hardy was interested in mathematics education, and his book A Course of Pure Mathematics had a profound effect on undergraduate instruction in mathematics in the first half of the twentieth century. Hardy also wrote A Mathematician’s Apology , in which he gives his answer to the question of whether it is worthwhile to devote one’s life to the study of mathematics. It presents Hardy’s view of what mathematics is and what a mathematician does. Hardy had a strong interest in sports. He was an avid cricket fan and followed scores closely. One peculiar trait he had was that he did not like his picture taken (only five snapshots are known) and disliked mirrors, covering them with towels immediately upon entering a hotel room.

=== PDF Page 8 | Book Page 103 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 103 (a) (b) FIGURE 1 (a) Chomp (top left cookie poisoned). (b) Three possible moves. Solution: We will give a nonconstructive existence proof of a winning strategy for the first player. That is, we will show that the first player always has a winning strategy without explicitly describing the moves this player must follow. First, note that the game ends and cannot finish in a draw because with each move at least one cookie is eaten, so after no more than m×nmoves the game ends, where the initial grid is m×n. Now, suppose that the first player begins the game by eating just the cookie in the bottom right corner. There are two possibilities, this is the first move of a winning strategy for the firstplayer, or the second player can make a move that is the first move of a winning strategy for thesecond player. In this second case, instead of eating just the cookie in the bottom right corner,the first player could have made the same move that the second player made as the first move ofa winning strategy (and then continued to follow that winning strategy). This would guaranteea win for the first player. Note that we showed that a winning strategy exists, but we did not specify an actual winning strategy. Consequently, the proof is a nonconstructive existence proof. In fact, no one has beenable to describe a winning strategy for Chomp that applies for all rectangular grids by describingthe moves that the first player should follow. However, winning strategies can be described forcertain special cases, such as when the grid is square and when the grid only has two rows ofcookies (see Exercises 15 and 16 in Section 5.2). ◂ 1.8.4 Uniqueness Proofs Some theorems assert the existence of a unique element with a particular property. In otherwords, these theorems assert that there is exactly one element with this property. To prove astatement of this type we need to show that an element with this property exists and that noother element has this property. The two parts of a uniqueness proof are: Existence: We show that an element xwith the desired property exists. Uniqueness: We show that if xandyboth have the desired property, then x=y. Remark: Showing that there is a unique element xsuch that P(x) is the same as proving the statement ∃x(P(x)∧∀y(y≠x→¬P(y))). We illustrate the elements of a uniqueness proof in Example 13. EXAMPLE 13 Show that if aandbare real numbers and a≠0, then there is a unique real number rsuch that ar+b=0.

=== PDF Page 9 | Book Page 104 ===
104 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs Solution: First, note that the real number r=−b∕ais a solution of ar+b=0 because a(−b∕a)+b=−b+b=0. Consequently, a real number rexists for which ar+b=0. This is the existence part of the proof. Second, suppose that sis a real number such that as+b=0. Then ar+b=as+b, where r=−b∕a. Subtracting bfrom both sides, we find that ar=as. Dividing both sides of this last Extra Examples equation by a, which is nonzero, we see that r=s. This establishes the uniqueness part of the proof. ◂ 1.8.5 Proof Strategies Finding proofs can be a challenging business. When you are confronted with a statement to prove, you should first replace terms by their definitions and then carefully analyze what the hypotheses and the conclusion mean. After doing so, you can attempt to prove the result using one of the available methods of proof. We have already provided some proof strategies in Section 1.7 for theorems of the form ∀x(P(x)→Q(x)), when we introduced direct proof, proof by contraposition, and proof by contradiction. If the statement is a conditional statement, try a direct proof first as long as the hypotheses provide a good starting point; if this fails, try a proof c/circlecopyrtNick Higham/Alamy Stock PhotoSRINIVASA RAMANUJAN (1887–1920) The renowned mathematical prodigy Ramanujan was born andLinks raised in southern India near the city of Madras (now called Chennai). His father was a clerk in a cloth shop. His mother contributed to the family income by singing at a local temple. Ramanujan studied at the local English language school, displaying his talent and interest for mathematics. At the age of 13 he mastered a textbook used by college students. When he was 15, a university student lent him a copy of Synopsis of Pure Mathematics . Ramanujan decided to work out the over 6000 results in this book, stated without proof or explanation, writing on sheets later collected to form notebooks. He graduated from high school in 1904, winning a scholarship to the University of Madras. Enrolling in a fine arts curriculum, he neglected his subjects other than mathematics and lost his scholarship. He failed to pass examinations at the university four times from 1904 to 1907, doing well only in mathematics. During this time he filled his notebooks with original writings, sometimes rediscovering already published work and at other times making new discoveries. Without a university degree, it was difficult for Ramanujan to find a decent job. To survive, he had to depend on the goodwill of his friends. He tutored students in mathematics, but his unconventional ways of thinking and failure to stick to the syllabus caused problems. He was married in 1909 in an arranged marriage to a young woman nine years his junior. Needing to support himself and his wife, he moved to Madras and sought a job. He showed his notebooks of mathematical writings to his potential employers, but the books bewildered them. However, a professor at the Presidency College recognized his genius and supported him, and in 1912 he found work as an accounts clerk, earning a small salary. Ramanujan continued his mathematical work during this time and published his first paper in 1910 in an Indian journal. He realized that his work was beyond that of the Indian mathematicians of his day and decided to write to leading English mathematicians. The first mathematicians he wrote to turned down his request for help. But in January 1913 he wrote to G. H. Hardy, who was inclined to turn Ramanujan down, but the mathematical statements in the letter, although stated without proof, puzzled Hardy. He decided to examine them closely with the help of his colleague and collaborator J. E. Littlewood. They decided, after careful study, that Ramanujan was probably a genius, because his statements “could only be written down by a mathematician of the highest class; they must be true, because if they were not true, no one would have the imagination to invent them.” Hardy arranged a scholarship for Ramanujan, bringing him to England in 1914. Hardy personally tutored him in mathematical analysis, and they collaborated for five years, proving significant theorems about the number of partitions of integers. During this time, Ramanujan made important contributions to number theory and also worked on continued fractions, infinite series, and elliptic functions. Ramanujan had amazing insight involving certain types of functions and series, but his purported theorems on prime numbers were often wrong, illustrating his vague idea of what constitutes a correct proof. He was one of the youngest members ever appointed a Fellow of the Royal Society. Unfortunately, in 1917 Ramanujan became extremely ill. At the time, it was thought that he had trouble with the English climate and had contracted tuberculosis. It is now thought that he suffered from a vitamin deficiency, brought on by Ramanujan’s strict vegetarianism and shortages in wartime England. He returned to India in 1919, continuing to do mathematics even when confined to his bed. He was religious and thought his mathematical talent came from his family deity, Namagiri. He considered mathematics and religion to be linked. He said that “an equation for me has no meaning unless it expresses a thought of God.” His short life came to an end in April 1920, when he was 32 years old. Ramanujan left several notebooks of unpublished results. The writings in these notebooks illustrate Ramanujan’s insights but are quite sketchy. Many mathematicians have devoted many years of work to explaining and justifying the results in these notebooks. An excellent movie, The Man Who Knew Infinity , about the life of Ramanujan was released in 2015.

=== PDF Page 10 | Book Page 105 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 105 by contrapostion. If neither of these approaches works, you might try a proof by contradiction. However, we did not provide any further guidance how to create such proofs. We now presentsome strategies that you can use to develop new proofs. FORWARD AND BACKWARD REASONING Whichever method you choose, you need a starting point for your proof. To begin a direct proof of a conditional statement, you start with thepremises. Using these premises, together with axioms and known theorems, you can constructa proof using a sequence of steps that leads to the conclusion. This type of reasoning, calledforward reasoning, is the most common type of reasoning used to prove relatively simple results.Similarly, with indirect reasoning you can start with the negation of the conclusion and, usinga sequence of steps, obtain the negation of the premises. Unfortunately, forward reasoning is often difficult to use to prove more complicated results, because the reasoning needed to reach the desired conclusion may be far from obvious. In suchcases it may be helpful to use backward reasoning. To reason backward to prove a statement q, we find a statement pthat we can prove with the property that p→q. (Note that it is not helpful to find a statement rthat you can prove such that q→r, because it is the fallacy of begging the question to conclude from q→randrthatqis true.) Backward reasoning is illustrated in Examples 14 and 15. EXAMPLE 14 Given two positive real numbers xandy, their arithmetic mean is (x+y)∕2 and their geometric mean is√xy. When we compare the arithmetic and geometric means of pairs of distinct positive real numbers, we find that the arithmetic mean is always greater than the geometric mean. [For example, when x=4 and y=6, we have 5 =(4+6)∕2>√ 4⋅6=√ 24.] Can we prove that this inequality is always true? Solution: To prove that (x +y)∕2>√xywhen xandyare distinct positive real numbers, we can work backward. We construct a sequence of equivalent inequalities. The equivalent inequalities are (x+y)∕2>√xy, (x+y)2∕4>xy, (x+y)2>4xy, x2+2xy+y2>4xy, x2−2xy+y2>0, (x−y)2>0. Because (x −y)2>0 when x≠y, it follows that the final inequality is true. Because all theseExtra Examples inequalities are equivalent, it follows that ( x+y)∕2>√xywhen x≠y. Once we have carried out this backward reasoning, we can build a proof based on reversing the steps. This produces construct a proof using forward reasoning. (Note that the steps of our backward reasoning willnot be part of the final proof. These steps serve as our guide for putting this proof together.) Proof: Suppose that xand yare distinct positive real numbers. Then ( x−y) 2>0 because the square of a nonzero real number is positive (see Appendix 1). Because ( x−y)2= x2−2xy+y2, this implies that x2−2xy+y2>0. Adding 4xy to both sides, we obtain x2+ 2xy+y2>4xy. Because x2+2xy+y2=(x+y)2, this means that (x +y)2≥4xy. Dividing both sides of this equation by 4, we see that (x +y)2∕4>xy. Finally, taking square roots of both sides (which preserves the inequality because both sides are positive) yields ( x+y)∕2>√xy.W e conclude that if xandyare distinct positive real numbers, then their arithmetic mean ( x+y)∕2 is greater than their geometric mean√xy. ◂

=== PDF Page 11 | Book Page 106 ===
106 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs EXAMPLE 15 Suppose that two people play a game taking turns removing one, two, or three stones at a time from a pile that begins with 15 stones. The person who removes the last stone wins the game.Show that the first player can win the game no matter what the second player does. Solution: To prove that the first player can always win the game, we work backward. At the last step, the first player can win if this player is left with a pile containing one, two, or three stones. The second player will be forced to leave one, two, or three stones if this player has toremove stones from a pile containing four stones. Consequently, one way for the first person towin is to leave four stones for the second player on the next-to-last move. The first person canleave four stones when there are five, six, or seven stones left at the beginning of this player’smove, which happens when the second player has to remove stones from a pile with eight stones.Consequently, to force the second player to leave five, six, or seven stones, the first player shouldleave eight stones for the second player at the second-to-last move for the first player. This meansthat there are nine, ten, or eleven stones when the first player makes this move. Similarly, thefirst player should leave twelve stones when this player makes the first move. We can reversethis argument to show that the first player can always make moves so that this player winsthe game no matter what the second player does. These moves successively leave twelve, eight,and four stones for the second player. ◂ ADAPTING EXISTING PROOFS An excellent way to look for possible approaches that can be used to prove a statement is to take advantage of existing proofs of similar results. Oftenan existing proof can be adapted to prove other facts. Even when this is not the case, some ofthe ideas used in existing proofs may be helpful. Because existing proofs provide clues for newproofs, you should read and understand the proofs you encounter in your studies. This processis illustrated in Example 16. EXAMPLE 16 In Example 11 of Section 1.7 we proved that√ 2 is irrational. We now conjecture that√ 3 is irrational. Can we adapt the proof in Example 11 in Section 1.7 to show that√ 3i s irrational? Solution: To adapt the proof in Example 11 in Section 1.7, we begin by mimicking the steps inExtra Examples that proof, but with√ 2 replaced with√ 3. First, we suppose that√ 3=c∕dwhere the fraction c∕dis in lowest terms. Squaring both sides tells us that 3 =c2∕d2, so that 3d2=c2.C a nw e use this equation to show that 3 must be a factor of both candd, similar to how we used the equation 2b2=a2in Example 11 in Section 1.7 to show that 2 must be a factor of both a andb? (Recall that an integer sis a factor of the integer tift∕sis an integer. An integer nis even if and only if 2 is a factor of n.) In turns out that we can, but we need some ammunition from number theory, which we will develop in Chapter 4. We sketch out the remainder of the proof, but leave the justification of these steps until Chapter 4. Because 3 is a factor of c2,i t must also be a factor of c. Furthermore, because 3 is a factor of c, 9 is a factor of c2, which means that 9 is a factor of 3 d2. This implies that 3 is a factor of d2, which means that 3 is a factor of that d. This makes 3 a factor of both candd, which contradicts the assumption that c∕dis in lowest terms. After we have filled in the justification for these steps, we will have shown that√ 3 is irrational by adapting the proof that√ 2 is irrational. Note that this proof can be extended to show that√ nis irrational whenever nis a positive integer that is not a perfect square. We leave the details of this to Chapter 4. ◂ A good tip is to look for existing proofs that you might adapt when you are confronted with proving a new theorem, particularly when the new theorem seems similar to one you havealready proved.

=== PDF Page 12 | Book Page 107 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 107 1.8.6 Looking for Counterexamples In Section 1.7 we introduced the use of counterexamples to show that certain statements are false. When confronted with a conjecture, you might first try to prove this conjecture, and ifyour attempts are unsuccessful, you might try to find a counterexample, first by looking atthe simplest, smallest examples. If you cannot find a counterexample, you might again try toprove the statement. In any case, looking for counterexamples is an extremely important pursuit,which often provides insights into problems. We will illustrate the role of counterexamples inExample 17. EXAMPLE 17 In Example 15 in Section 1.7 we showed that the statement “Every positive integer is the sum oftwo squares of integers” is false by finding a counterexample. That is, there are positive integersthat cannot be written as the sum of the squares of two integers. Although we cannot write everypositive integer as the sum of the squares of two integers, maybe we can write every positiveinteger as the sum of the squares of three integers. That is, is the statement “Every positiveinteger is the sum of the squares of three integers” true or false? Solution: Because we know that not every positive integer can be written as the sum of twoExtra Examples squares of integers, we might initially be skeptical that every positive integer can be written as the sum of three squares of integers. So, we first look for a counterexample. That is, we can showthat the statement “Every positive integer is the sum of three squares of integers” is false if wecan find a particular integer that is not the sum of the squares of three integers. To look for acounterexample, we try to write successive positive integers as a sum of three squares. We findthat 1=0 2+02+12,2=02+12+12,3=12+12+12,4=02+02+22,5=02+12+22, 6=12+12+22, but we cannot find a way to write 7 as the sum of three squares. To show that there are not three squares that add up to 7, we note that the only possible squares we can useare those not exceeding 7, namely, 0, 1, and 4. Because no three terms where each term is 0, 1,or 4 add up to 7, it follows that 7 is a counterexample. We conclude that the statement “Everypositive integer is the sum of the squares of three integers” is false. We have shown that not every positive integer is the sum of the squares of three integers. The next question to ask is whether every positive integer is the sum of the squares of fourpositive integers. Some experimentation provides evidence that the answer is yes. For exam-ple, 7=1 2+12+12+22,2 5=42+22+22+12, and 87=92+22+12+12. It turns out the conjecture “Every positive integer is the sum of the squares of four integers” is true. For a proof,see [Ro10]. ◂ 1.8.7 Proof Strategy in Action Mathematics is generally taught as if mathematical facts were carved in stone. Mathematicstexts (including the bulk of this book) formally present theorems and their proofs. Such presen-tations do not convey the discovery process in mathematics. This process begins with exploringconcepts and examples, asking questions, formulating conjectures, and attempting to settle theseconjectures either by proof or by counterexample. These are the day-to-day activities of math-ematicians. Believe it or not, the material taught in textbooks was originally developed in thisway. People formulate conjectures on the basis of many types of possible evidence. The examExtra Examples ination of special cases can lead to a conjecture, as can the identification of possible patterns. Altering the hypotheses and conclusions of known theorems also can lead to plausible conjec-tures. At other times, conjectures are made based on intuition or a belief that a result holds.No matter how a conjecture was made, once it has been formulated, the goal is to prove or dis-prove it. When mathematicians believe that a conjecture may be true, they try to find a proof. Ifthey cannot find a proof, they may look for a counterexample. When they cannot find a coun-terexample, they may switch gears and once again try to prove the conjecture. Although many

=== PDF Page 13 | Book Page 108 ===
108 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs FIGURE 2 The standard checkerboard.FIGURE 3 Two dominoes. conjectures are quickly settled, a few conjectures resist attack for hundreds of years and lead tothe development of new parts of mathematics. We will mention a few famous conjectures laterin this section. 1.8.8 Tilings We can illustrate aspects of proof strategy through a brief study of tilings of checkerboards.Looking at tilings of checkerboards is a fruitful way to quickly discover many different resultsand construct their proofs using a variety of proof methods. There are almost an endless number Linksof conjectures that can be made and studied in this area, too. To begin, we need to define someterms. A checkerboard is a rectangle divided into squares of the same size by horizontal and vertical lines. The game of checkers is played on a board with 8 rows and 8 columns; thisboard is called the standard checkerboard and is shown in Figure 2. In this section we use the term board to refer to a checkerboard of any rectangular size as well as parts of checkerboards obtained by removing one or more squares. A domino is a rectangular piece that is one square by two squares, as shown in Figure 3. We say that a board is tiled by dominoes when all its squares are covered with no overlapping dominoes and no dominoes overhanging the board.We now develop some results about tiling boards using dominoes. EXAMPLE 18 Can we tile the standard checkerboard using dominoes? Solution: We can find many ways to tile the standard checkerboard using dominoes. For example, we can tile it by placing 32 dominoes horizontally, as shown in Figure 4. The existence of one such tiling completes a constructive existence proof. There are a large number of otherways to do this tiling. We can place 32 dominoes vertically on the board or we can place sometiles vertically and some horizontally. But for a constructive existence proof we needed to findjust one such tiling. ◂ EXAMPLE 19 Can we tile a board obtained by removing one of the four corner squares of a standard checker-board? Solution: To answer this question, note that a standard checkerboard has 64 squares, so removingExtra Examples a square produces a board with 63 squares. Now suppose that we could tile a board obtained from the standard checkerboard by removing a corner square. The board has an even number ofsquares because each domino covers two squares and no two dominoes overlap and no dominoes

=== PDF Page 14 | Book Page 109 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 109 FIGURE 4 Tiling the standard checkerboard. FIGURE 5 The standard checkerboard with the upper left and lower right squares removed. overhang the board. Consequently, we can prove by contradiction that a standard checkerboardwith one square removed cannot be tiled using dominoes because such a board has an oddnumber of squares. ◂ We now consider a trickier situation. EXAMPLE 20 Can we tile the board obtained by deleting the upper left and lower right corner squares of astandard checkerboard, shown in Figure 5? Solution: A board obtained by deleting two squares of a standard checkerboard contains 64−2=62 squares. Because 62 is even, we cannot quickly rule out the existence of a tiling of the standard checkerboard with its upper left and lower right squares removed, unlike Example 19, where we ruled out the existence of a tiling of the standard checkerboard with one cornersquare removed. Trying to construct a tiling of this board by successively placing dominoesmight be a first approach, as the reader should attempt. However, no matter how much we try,we cannot find such a tiling. Because our efforts do not produce a tiling, we are led to conjecturethat no tiling exists. We might try to prove that no tiling exists by showing that we reach a dead end however we successively place dominoes on the board. To construct such a proof, we would have toconsider all possible cases that arise as we run through all possible choices of successivelyplacing dominoes. For example, we have two choices for covering the square in the secondcolumn of the first row, next to the removed top left corner. We could cover it with a horizontallyplaced tile or a vertically placed tile. Each of these two choices leads to further choices, and soon. It does not take long to see that this is not a fruitful plan of attack for a person, although acomputer could be used to complete such a proof by exhaustion. (Exercise 47 asks you to supplysuch a proof to show that a 4 ×4 checkerboard with opposite corners removed cannot be tiled.) We need another approach. Perhaps there is an easier way to prove there is no tiling of a standard checkerboard with two opposite corners removed. As with many proofs, a key ob-servation can help. We color the squares of this checkerboard using alternating white and blacksquares, as in Figure 2. Observe that a domino in a tiling of such a board covers one white squareand one black square. Next, note that this board has unequal numbers of white squares and black

=== PDF Page 15 | Book Page 110 ===
110 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs squares. We can use these observations to prove by contradiction that a standard checkerboard with opposite corners removed cannot be tiled using dominoes. We now present such a proof. Proof: Suppose we can use dominoes to tile a standard checkerboard with opposite corners removed. Note that the standard checkerboard with opposite corners removed contains 64−2=62 squares. The tiling would use 62∕2 =31 dominoes. Note that each domino in this tiling covers one white and one black square. Consequently, the tiling covers 31 white squaresand 31 black squares. However, when we remove two opposite corner squares, either 32 of theremaining squares are white and 30 are black or else 30 are white and 32 are black. This contra-dicts the assumption that we can use dominoes to cover a standard checkerboard with oppositecorners removed, completing the proof. ◂ FIGURE 6 A right triominoand a straighttriomino.We can use other types of pieces besides dominoes in tilings. Instead of dominoes we can study tilings that use identically shaped pieces constructed from congruent squares that areconnected along their edges. Such pieces are called polyominoes, a term coined in 1953 by the mathematician Solomon Golomb, the author of an entertaining book about them [Go94]. Wewill consider two polyominoes with the same number of squares the same if we can rotate and/orflip one of the polyominoes to get the other one. For example, there are two types of triominoes(see Figure 6), which are polyominoes made up of three squares connected by their sides. Onetype of triomino, the straight triomino , has three horizontally connected squares; the other type, right triominoes, resembles the letter L in shape, flipped and/or rotated, if necessary. We will study the tilings of a checkerboard by straight triominoes here; we will study tilings by righttriominoes in Section 5.1. EXAMPLE 21 Can you use straight triominoes to tile a standard checkerboard? Solution: The standard checkerboard contains 64 squares and each triomino covers three squares. Consequently, if triominoes tile a board, the number of squares of the board must be a multiple of 3. Because 64 is not a multiple of 3, triominoes cannot be used to cover an 8 ×8 checkerboard. ◂ In Example 22, we consider the problem of using straight triominoes to tile a standard checkerboard with one corner missing. EXAMPLE 22 Can we use straight triominoes to tile a standard checkerboard with one of its four cornersremoved? An 8 ×8 checkerboard with one corner removed contains 64 −1=63 squares. Any tiling by straight triominoes of one of these four boards uses 63∕3 =21 triominoes. However, when we experiment, we cannot find a tiling of one of these boards using straight triominoes.A proof by exhaustion does not appear promising. Can we adapt our proof from Example 20 toprove that no such tiling exists? Solution: We will color the squares of the checkerboard in an attempt to adapt the proof by contradiction we gave in Example 20 of the impossibility of using dominoes to tile a standard checkerboard with opposite corners removed. Because we are using straight triominoes ratherthan dominoes, we color the squares using three colors rather than two colors, as shown in Fig-ure 7. Note that there are 21 blue squares, 21 black squares, and 22 white squares in this coloring.Next, we make the crucial observation that when a straight triomino covers three squares of thecheckerboard, it covers one blue square, one black square, and one white square. Next, note thateach of the three colors appears in a corner square. Thus, without loss of generality, we mayassume that we have rotated the coloring so that the missing square is colored blue. Therefore,we assume that the remaining board contains 20 blue squares, 21 black squares, and 22 whitesquares.

=== PDF Page 16 | Book Page 111 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 111 FIGURE 7 Coloring the squares of the standard checkerboard with three colors. If we could tile this board using straight triominoes, then we would use 63/3 =21 straight triominoes. These triominoes would cover 21 blue squares, 21 black squares, and 21 white squares. This contradicts the fact that this board contains 20 blue squares, 21 black squares, and22 white squares. Therefore, we cannot tile this board using straight triominoes. ◂ 1.8.9 The Role of Open Problems Many advances in mathematics have been made by people trying to solve famous unsolvedproblems. In the past 20 years, many unsolved problems have finally been resolved, such as theproof of a conjecture in number theory made more than 300 years ago. This conjecture assertsthe truth of the statement known as Fermat’s last theorem. THEOREM 1 FERMAT’S LAST THEOREM The equation xn+yn=zn has no solutions in integers x,y, and zwith xyz≠0 whenever nis an integer with n>2. Remark: The equation x2+y2=z2has infinitely many solutions in integers x,y, and z; theseLinkssolutions are called Pythagorean triples and correspond to the lengths of the sides of right tri-angles with integer lengths. See Exercise 34. This problem has a fascinating history. In the seventeenth century, Fermat jotted in the margin of his copy of the works of Diophantus that he had a “wondrous proof” that there are nointeger solutions of x n+yn=znwhen nis an integer greater than 2 with xyz≠0. However, he never published a proof (Fermat published almost nothing), and no proof could be found inthe papers he left when he died. Mathematicians looked for a proof for three centuries withoutsuccess, although many people were convinced that a relatively simple proof could be found.(Proofs of special cases were found, such as the proof of the case when n=3 by Euler and the proof of the n=4 case by Fermat himself.) Over the years, several established mathematicians thought that they had proved this theorem. In the nineteenth century, one of these failed

=== PDF Page 17 | Book Page 112 ===
112 1 / The Foundations: Logic and Proofs attempts led to the development of the part of number theory called algebraic number theory. A correct proof, requiring hundreds of pages of advanced mathematics, was not found until the 1990s, when Andrew Wiles used recently developed ideas from a sophisticated area of number theory called the theory of elliptic curves to prove Fermat’s last theorem. Wiles’s quest to find a proof of Fermat’s last theorem using this powerful theory, described in a program in the Nova series on public television, took close to ten years! Moreover, his proof was based on major contributions of many mathematicians. (The interested reader should consult [Ro10] for more information about Fermat’s last theorem and for additional references concerning this problem and its resolution.) We now state an open problem that is simple to describe, but that seems quite difficult to resolve. EXAMPLE 23 The 3x+1Conjecture LetTbe the transformation that sends an even integer xtox∕2 and an odd integer xto 3x+1. A famous conjecture, sometimes known as the 3x+1 conjecture , states that for all positive integers x, when we repeatedly apply the transformation T,w eLinkswill eventually reach the integer 1. For example, starting with x=13, we find T(13)= 3⋅13+1=40, T(40)=40∕2=20, T(20)=20∕2=10, T(10)=10∕2=5, T(5)= 3⋅5+1=16,T(16)=8,T(8)=4,T(4)=2, and T(2)=1. The 3 x+1 conjecture has been verified using computers for all integers xup to 5.48⋅1018. The 3 x+1 conjecture has an interesting history and has attracted the attention of mathematicians since the 1950s. The conjecture has been raised many times and goes by many other names, including the Collatz problem, Hasse’s algorithm, Ulam’s problem, the Syracuse problem, and Kakutani’s problem. Many mathematicians have been diverted from their work to spend time attacking this conjecture. This led to the joke that this problem was part of a conspir-Watch out! Working on the 3 x+1 problem can be addictive.acy to slow down American mathematical research. See the article by Jeffrey Lagarias [La10] for a fascinating discussion of this problem and the results that have been found by mathematicians attacking it. ◂ There are a surprising number of important open problems throughout discrete mathematics. For instance, in Chapter 4 you will encounter many open questions about prime numbers. (Students already familiar with the basic notions about primes might want to explore Section c/circlecopyrtCharles Rex Arbogast/AP ImagesANDREW WILES (born 1953) Andrew Wiles was born in Cambridge, England. His father was a Professor of Divinity. Wiles attended the King’s College School and the Leys School in Cambridge. Wiles become interested in Fermat’s last theorem when at age ten he read a book stating the problem. He knew then that he would never let this problem go, as it looked simple but none of the great mathematicians could solve it. Wiles entered Merton College, Oxford in 1971. He received his B.A. in 1974, and then entered Clare College, Cambridge, for his graduate studies. He received his Ph.D. in 1980; his graduate research was on the theory of elliptic curves. He was a Benjamin Peirce Assistant Professor at Harvard University from 1977 until 1980. In 1981, he held a post at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, and in 1982 he was appointed to a professorship at Princeton University. He was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1985 and spent a year at the Institut des Hautes ´Etudes Scientifiques and the ´Ecole Normale Sup ´erieure in Paris. Ironically, he did not realize that during his years working on elliptic curves he was learning techniques that would later help him solve the problem that obsessed him. In 1986 when Wiles learned of work that showed that Fermat’s last theorem follows from a conjecture in the theory of elliptic curves, he realized that this led to a possible strategy for a poof. He abandoned his ongoing research and devoted himself entirely to working on Fermat’s last theorem. It took him more than seven years to complete his proof and two more years for some parts of the proof to be corrected. During this time he spent time only on this problem and with his young daughters. In 1988 he took a position as a research professor at Oxford University, returning to Princeton in 1990, where he remained until 2011, when he rejoined Oxford University as the Royal Society Research Professor. Not only did Wiles become famous when he proved Fermat’s last theorem, he also won the Wolfskehl Prize, which was established in 1908 for the first correct proof. This prize included 100,000 German marks (in the currency of the day), which would have been worth over $1,500,000 today. Although it was common wisdom that this prize had become worthless because of the two world wars, currency changes, and hyperinflation, Wiles received approximately $50,000. Wiles has won many of the top awards in mathematics, including the Abel Prize, the Fermat Prize, and the Wolf Prize. In 2000, he was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire by the Queen of England, making him Sir Andrew Wiles.

=== PDF Page 18 | Book Page 113 ===
1.8 Proof Methods and Strategy 113 4.3, where these open questions are discussed.) You will encounter many other open questions as you read this book. The study of such problems has played and continues to play an importantrole in the development of many parts of discrete mathematics. Build up your arsenal of proof methods as youwork through this book. 1.8.10 Additional Proof Methods In this chapter we introduced the basic methods used in proofs. We also described how to leverage these methods to prove a variety of results. We will use these proof methods in all subse-quent chapters. In particular, we will use them in Chapters 2, 3, and 4 to prove results aboutsets, functions, algorithms, and number theory and in Chapters 9, 10, and 11 to prove results ingraph theory. Among the theorems we will prove is the famous halting theorem, which statesthat there is a problem that cannot be solved using any procedure. However, there are many im-portant proof methods besides those we have covered. We will introduce some of these methodslater in this book. In particular, in Section 5.1 we will discuss mathematical induction, whichis an extremely useful method for proving statements of the form ∀nP(n), where the domain consists of all positive integers. In Section 5.3 we will introduce structural induction, which canbe used to prove results about recursively defined sets. We will use the Cantor diagonalizationmethod, which can be used to prove results about the size of infinite sets, in Section 2.5. InChapter 6 we will introduce the notion of combinatorial proofs, which can be used to prove re-sults by counting arguments. The reader should note that entire books have been devoted to theactivities discussed in this section, including many excellent works by George P ´olya ([Po61], [Po71], [Po90]). Finally, note that we have not given a procedure that can be used for proving theorems in mathematics. It is a deep theorem of mathematical logic that there is no such procedure. Exercises 1.Prove that n2+1≥2nwhen nis a positive integer with 1≤n≤4. 2.Use a proof by cases to show that 10 is not the square of a positive integer. [ Hint: Consider two cases: (i)1 ≤x≤3, (ii)x≥4.] 3.Use a proof by cases to show that 100 is not the cube of a positive integer. [ Hint: Consider two cases: (i)1 ≤x≤4, (ii)x≥5.] 4.Prove that there are no positive perfect cubes less than 1000 that are the sum of the cubes of two positive integers. 5.Prove that if xandyare real numbers, then max(x, y)+ min(x, y)=x+y.[Hint: Use a proof by cases, with the two cases corresponding to x≥yand x<y, respectively.] 6.Use a proof by cases to show that min(a,min(b, c))= min(min (a, b),c ) whenever a,b,a n d care real numbers. 7.Prove using the notion of without loss of generality thatmin(x, y)=(x+y−|x−y|)∕2a n d max(x, y) =(x+y+ |x−y|)∕2 whenever xandyare real numbers. 8.Prove using the notion of without loss of generality that 5x+5yis an odd integer when xandyare integers of opposite parity.9.Prove the triangle inequality, which states that if xandy are real numbers, then |x|+|y|≥|x+y|(where |x|represents the absolute value of x, which equals xifx≥0 and equals −xifx<0). 10.Prove that there is a positive integer that equals the sumof the positive integers not exceeding it. Is your proofconstructive or nonconstructive? 11.Prove that there are 100 consecutive positive integers thatare not perfect squares. Is your proof constructive or non-constructive? 12.Prove that either 2 ⋅10 500+15 or 2 ⋅10500+16 is not a perfect square. Is your proof constructive or nonconstruc-tive? 13.Prove that there exists a pair of consecutive integers suchthat one of these integers is a perfect square and the otheris a perfect cube. 14.Show that the product of two of the numbers 65 1000− 82001+3177,7 91212−92399+22001, and 244493−58192+ 71777is nonnegative. Is your proof constructive or nonconstructive? [ Hint: Do not try to evaluate these numbers!] 15.Prove or disprove that there is a rational number xand an irrational number ysuch that xyis irrational. 16.Prove or disprove that if aandbare rational numbers, then abis also rational.
